

DESIGNS 


FOR 



Paris!) Cl)nrfl)fs, 



IN THE THREE STYLES OF 




4Snglifiri) Cijutd) Slrci) itccturc; 


WITH AN 

ANALYSIS OF EACH STYLE; A REVIEW OF THE NOMENCLATURE OF THE 

PERIODS OF ENGLISH GOTHIC ARCHITECTURE, AND SOME 

REMARKS INTRODUCTORY TO CHURCH BUILDING, 

CXBMPUFIBD IN A SBRIVS OF 

OVER ONE HUNDRED ILLUSTRATIONS. 


J. COLEMAN HART, Architect 

■ . r ;: - 

- v 



, I 



"Taste and art, rejecting heathen mould, 
Shall draw their types from Europe's middle night. 
Well pleased if such good darkness be their light.** 



NeiD^IIork: 



DANA AND COMPANY, 

Xo. 381 BROADWAY. 



1867. 



a &gt;^ , 1898 


Entered in conformity with an Act of Congress, entitled “ An Act to amend the several 
Acte reeoertjng copy-rights, ” in the year Anno Domini, 1866, 

By J. COLEMAN HART, 

In the Clerk’s Office of the Southern District of New York. 



Contents. 


Preface 5 

Introduction— 

The Origin of English Gothic Architecture . , . .11 

Orientation . 15 

Plan 18 

Material 24 

Entrance -.27 

Chancel a 1 

Gallery 35 

Pew 38 

Altar 40 

Sedilia 42 

Piscina 43 

Font 43 

Pulpit 40 

Lectern t . ......... 49 

Warming and Ventilating 50 

Canons of Gothic Composition 55 

bfotnenclatnre . ' 59 


Qlnalgsie of t!)c Carlg ©ttgliel) Stole — 

Chronology 


Doorways 

Windows 

Piers 

Arches 

Buttresses 

Moldings 

Roofs 


Description of the Plates of tt)c (Sarin (English Stnle- 

Desiox I 

Dimensions 

N umber of Sittings ...... 


Digitized by Google 




COX T K X T S. 


DESIGN II. la 


Dimensions . . 

Xuinlier of Sittings , 

iXmilnois of the Dccoralcb gnglisli 6lnlc- 

Chronologv . . . 

Doorways ...... 


Itt 

till 


Si 

as 


Windows 

Piers and Arche* .... 


aa 

87* 

Buttresses ..... 


aa 


Moldings S2 

Kooi-. ........... an 

Description of the Plates of the EDtotaDft gnflliafr Stgle— 

Dksi.ix HI. . . . . . , , . . . aa 

Dimensions . . iia 

Xuinlier of Sittings . SJi 

Design IV. as 

Dimensions Si 

Number of Sittings 2S 

a.nolnsis of the flcrpcnbicnlar gnqti3li 9tplc— 

Chronology ....... ... SI 

Doorways 100 

Wimlows 1112 

Piers anil Arches liii 

Buttr ess es 1QA 

Moldings . . 105 

Roofs ■ 10(1 

Description of tl)e plates of tljc Pcrpenbicular gnglial) Stnlc — 

Design V. ion 

Dimensions 


N umber of Sittings 







11Q 

Design VI. 







. im 

Dimensions 







1 10 

Number of Sittings 

. 


• 


# 


. LLL 


Digitized by Google 


preface. 


ANY valuable works have been published in 
England on its Medieval Architecture, from 
which students who have not facilities for 
visiting its shores, adorned with all that is 
beautiful and instructive in Gothic Architect- 
ure, have been enabled to form some idea of what it 
really is. 

Books have been printed for their assistance, exhibiting 
the chronologically arranged periods and analyses of the 
styles into which Gothic Architecture has been divided, and 
elucidating the architectural peculiarities, incident to these 
several periods, which differ so much as to allow of distinct 
classifications — consequently making the study of Gothic 
Architecture as clear and comprehensive as that of the Gre- 
cian or Roman. 

# 

In this labor — it might be said of love — English writers 
particularly have been very successful and greatly appreci- 
ated ; and various Archaeological and Ecclesiological socie- 
ties, actuated by zealous motives, justly priding themselves 
upon the architectural beauties among which they live, know- 
ing their great value as studies, and desiring the student to 
become thoroughly conversant with them as such, with a view 
to the improvement of modern Church Architecture, have 



Digitized by Google 



6 


PREFACE. 


delineated and published from time to time various works 
on Medieval Church Architecture of inestimable value, which 
we cannot too highly eulogize. Thus the student who cannot 
enjoy practical studies of Old English examples as they exist, 
becomes every day more and more indebted to the authors 
of these valuable and important works. 

Owing to the difficulties of research, the time required and 
the labor attending the delineation of the illustrations of these 
works, and the great expense necessary to their production 
in this country, their issue is mostly confined to the larger 
cities; and the rural student does not therefore receive his 
quota of the benefits that were graciously intended for him. 

The nice discrimination required iu studying in this manner 
the Architecture of Medieval buildings, as very few of them 
are free from a mixture of all the styles of Gothic Archi- 
tecture, renders the use of any one of these styles — necessary 
to be taken from many studies to perfect a pure design — 
seriously difficult. 

Anomalies which are constantly seen in rural parishes are 
the unmistakable consequences; and “however correct” the 
student’s “taste, or keen his perception of real beauty, he 
could not enter into the details, or understand why this was 
curious and that peculiarly instructive as a specimen of its 
kind. All would be a blank, from inability to divide and 
particularize. He would regard it only as a whole.”* 

The vital principle of the study of Gothic Architecture, | 
as divided into the three great periods, namely, the Early 
English, the Decorated English, and the Perpendicular Eng- 

0 Palcy'g Manual. 


Digitized by Google 






I 


lish, is the imbodying either one of them in a complete 
design unadulterated and free from admixture with the pre- 
ceding or succeeding period. 

No author that I am aware of, in this country, has as yet 
issued a publication based on this principle. The want, with 
all the beautiful material at hand, should be relieved. It is 
hoped that the student may find some hints of value to him 
in this volume, which is a simple effort to supply a deficiency 
in the area of Architectural publications. 


In too many instances the erection of the parish church is 
directly undertaken by the priest of the parish, or by a par- 
ishioner, aware of his incapacity in matters of church archi- 
tecture, (when presumption has not the better part,) but 
forced by circumstances, in his view of the case, to undertake 
a commission of such vital importance to the spread of 
Christianity and to Architecture as an art. 

Far away from architects of ability, and knowing the in- 
competency of those around him, he seems to the uninitiated, 
to be driven to this hopeless alternative ; and what he pro- 
duces is often misconceived and exceptionable in many par- 
ticulars. As -if to make architectural amende , the quasi archi- 
tect — and the class is daily increasing in number under the 
present rule of things — shields himself behind apologies ad 



libitum , devised with more of skill and truth to nature, than 
are displayed in his works, which prove to be but the ceno- 
taph of his absurdities, that know no transition save to a 
horrible life everlasting. 

Position and recognized ability in other than the architect’s 
vocation often favor the easy promulgation of these miscon- 
ceptions and mal-inventions ; and thus, old in ignorance, with 


Digitized by Google 




8 PREFACE. 


the air of “knowledge in all things,” are foisted upon the 
unwary a class of pretenders who degrade rather than en- 
courage the study of Architecture in its legitimate sphere. 

It is not an uncommon proceeding for parishioners to apply 
to better skilled artists, at a distance, for their design, when 
the erection of a church is projected, and console themselves 
with the false idea that they have all that is required for so 
holy an undertaking when inspecting the voluminous rolls of 
designs transmitted to them. 

It is just as important at this period that the erection of 
the church proposed from such design should be under the j 
eye of the architect., as that the design should, in the first 
instance, be good in itself ; for if the recipient is competent 
to carry out the architect’s design, he underrates his abilities 
when commissioning an architect at a distance to prepare the ; I 
design for him. 

“ The old builders possessed nothing but the sound intelli- 
gence of sensible men, and an aptness in practice exercised 
from earliest youth. They lived more at the building place 
than at home ; thought of little else and did little else ; and 
thus they evidently succeeded much better than our well- 
grounded sages, who often bring into the world their left- 
handed productions, or tamely written pamphlets, and would 
fain superintend the erection of buildings from their writing- 
desk.”* 

But how must this erroneous and too common practice be 
obviated, and the proper attention given to the encourage- 
ment of bona fide architects, that there may be more fitness and 
rubrical propriety in the erection of our parish churches? 

° WheweU’R “Note*.” 


Digitized by Google 




t 


PREFACE. ii 


An answer to this inquiry it is humbly presumed may be 
found, to a slight extent, in the volume now presented to the 
public; and should it tend in the smallest degree to the ad- 
vancement of a proper understanding of Church Architecture 
and correct professional practice, the author will have dis- 
charged, however imperfectly, some small portion of his duty, 
feeling that his humble efforts should be given to the diffusing 
of a correct knowledge of this high and most noble study of 
all art, Church Architecture. 

“Would it were worthier.” 

J. COI.KMAX HART, Architect. 


167 Rrottdxnay, Nem York. 





Digitized by Google 



introduction. 


** We may not l»e able to command good or beautiful, or inventive architecture ; but 
we am command iui honest architecture : the meagemess of poverty may be pardoned, 
the sternnew of utility respected,” o o o 

S it is intended that this work should be as 
useful as the material at command will make 
it, and not be confounded with archaeological 
dissertations and theories that are of interest 
only in their proper spheres, it would not 
become the object in view to endeavor to trace or theorize 
upon the origin of the Architecture which is now under con- 
sideration ; a cursory glance will be all that is necessary. 

Much has already been said upon this very interesting sub- 
ject. Great minds, versed in archieology, have grappled with 
it and left no stpne unturned, no twig its bent, no form its 
rest ; until the intersection of rouud mural arches, the grove 
of the forest-trees with their knotty trunks and interlacing 
branches, and the constructive necessity for elevating the 
round arch to the pointed, have all been assumed as the sug- 
gestive origin of that Architecture — need I say the Gothic ?* — 
which has filled the world with admiration and wonder. 

° “Upon no subject of antiquity have bo many discordant opinions Imxjii maintained, 
os upon the origin of what is called Gothick Architecture. o o o o 
“It is a fact concerning which controversy is no longer entertained, tlmt the nltoriginal 



Digitized by Google 



0 



lz INTRODUCTION. 


It is of as little cousequeuce to t!w architect in his practice 
to know who invented the pointed arch, as it is for him to 
know in which country Gothic Architecture first existed 
At all events, in a historical point of view, with many valua- 
hie writings before him as instructive lessons, he will not need 
to conjecture much or travel far, in order to find antecedents 
or parallels to all his own fanciful theories perchance already 
in existence. 

’! „ i 

If the southern part of Europe may be considered the 
birth-place of the pointed. arch, certainly the soil was not 
very congenial to its development, and its beautiful fruits 
• and ramifications did not arrive at maturity until its trans- 
planting was accomplished many years afterwards. 

. 

The late Thomas Hope, in his Historical Essay on Archi- 
tecture, says, “ Were I disposed to found a new theory on a 
mere superficial resemblance, I might trace the last and most 
luxuriant efflorescence of the Gothic style, not to the barba- 
rians of the North, but to the most anciently civilized nations 
of the South, — indeed of the terraqueous globe — to that na- 
tion - to which we naturally look for every art and science of 

Uotlis had no share either in the invention or perfection of that peculiar style of Archi- , 
tec t urc which boars their name. o o o Hy the Goths, no individual 

nation is alluded to, but the Northern conquerom in general, before they were incorpo- 
rated with the people they hod subdued. Gothick, therefore, should Iks considered merely 
us a term to convey reproach to every thing in literature and arts, which was not strictly 
accordant with the antique model, adopted and applied by those who had introduced the 
restored Grecian." — DaUaway « Discounts upon Architecture in England. 

\ “ In popular phraseology, we use the word Gothic to designate a class of unclassical 

architecture ; and the terra may not be objectionable as applied to the buildings of Sir 
Christopher Wren, and some Inter architects. Their structures have no order, nor yet 
system, or symmetry of style ; hut the Oiristum Architecture of the middle ages, from the 
Norman conquest to the dissolution of monasteries, is marked at every separate era by an 
! unity, harmony, and distinctive concordance of parts.” — Ration's Account of the Church of 
St. Luke, Chrism . — - 1 Hunt rat u nit of the Euhlic Budding 9 of Ixmdun. 


Digitized by Google 



GOTHIC ARCHITECTURE. 13 

I which we cannot discern a later and nearer origin — to the 

Hindoos.” 

I 

So beautiful a feature in construction as the pointed arch, 
with its acknowledged ascendency over all other forms of its 
kind, in its easy adaptations without detriment to all situations 
and requirements, and its fitness to express by symbolism 
ritual ideas and devout aspirations, could not long remain 
j 'dormant. The seed of all Gothic art was not destined to 
remain undeveloped. Germinatiou proceeded and, as it 
were, its pollen was quickly wafted by propitious winds 
to remote countries north and west. It mingled with the 
peculiar architecture of those countries, continued but a 
brief while in transition, and from its nature, as the beauti- 
ful and useful will always predominate, it soon reared itself 
upon the ruins of the worn-out Roman or Lombard round 
arch. 

The unyielding form of the latter, either in its adaptation 
to the now elevated vault, with its ponderous ribs, or to the 
elongated window, with its massive voussoir, fell into disuse, 
i and was soon cast aside for the more delicate and aspiring 
contour of the former (or pointed) with its web-like rib 
mouldings and neatly managed intersections. What glories 
in art were ushered into existence by the presence of this 
single precious germ ! 

Germany, France and England, the lands of its adoption, 
all afforded congenial soil for the reproduction of its seed. 
All alike claim it as indigenous to themselves, as having pri- 
ority of existence in their own precincts, and each boasts of 
its superior monuments of cathedrals, abbeys and churches 


Digitized by Google 




— -q 


u INTRODUCTION. 


that now live to hIiow us the diversified and far-spread fruit 
of a single principle. 

I I' 

Difference of origin, mode of life, tastes and climates uatu- 
rally had a marked effect upon the advancing growth of their 
fostered, pointed architecture, and therefore to these causes 
should we trace the dissimilarity now existing in the Gothic 
Architecture of these three countries. 

“ I have already mentioned a German author,” says Mr. 
Hope, in his Historical Essay on Architecture, “ the Chevalier 
Wiebeking of Munich, who, in support of the claims of his 
countrymen to the introduction of this description of forms, 
which he attributes to St. Bernward, Bishop of Hildesheim, 
ascribes the foundation of many of the principal pointed 
churches of Germany to eras so much earlier than any we 
can quote elsewhere, that, supposing these to be genuine, the 
priority, the invention, of the pointed style in Germany is 
proved, and we have nothing further to say on that score.” 

lii Germany, then, let us lay the foundation of all Gothic 
art — look to her as the mother of it. Her claims to such 
maternity surely have been ably and truthfully enough advo- 
cated. Then trace its migration to nursing France, in whose 
lap it grew strong and healthy and whimsical, where it made 
gigantic strides, aided by the mighty boldness and native in- 
| genuity of its Gallic foster-fathers. And follow its march, 
until it reached England, whose most favorable clime, pre- 
pared for its final settlement, gave it that surprising impetus 
in its progress to manhood and maturity which mark it, it 
would seem, as almost native there. 

Those peculiarities that were born in Germany and fructi- 


Digitized by Google 



ORIENTATION. 


16 


fied in France, were gradually lost — and well they were — by 
its associations in England 

The different manners and customs of the Britons, oper- 
ating now with increased vivacity, infused another life into 
it, .and Gothic Architecture lived and does now live in its 
mouldering ruins as the peculiar architecture of the English 
people — as the characteristic work of their forefathers — as 
the consequence of the religious zeal of its architects, the 
product of centuries. What noble results ! 

As the peculiar habits and religious faith of the old Eng- 
lish people, did mature a characteristic mode of building, a 
national Ecclesiastical Architecture for their religious require- 
ments, and many example's still exist as monuments of their 
faith ; so do I conclude and believe that the Church Archi- 
tecture of England , can have no true existence under a system 
foreign to her own. 


| 

i 


(Orientation. 


In America a valuable result of our nascent endeavors and 
of our opposition to Paganism in art is, that the importance 
of Church Architecture has grown to be more acknowledged 
and appreciated. Its extraordinary progress among us attests 
the working of some great cause, that has aroused us from 
our lethargy, and is disseminating the truths of this noble art 
from day to day in the breasts of those who are humbly pre- 
pared to receive them. 

But Church Architecture — what is it? 

Is it the beautiful traceried window, or the pinuacled 


Digitized by Google 



10 


INTRODUCTION. 


buttress, or the tall tower with its tapering spire that 
makes it? 

No — it is the reverent hand, the religious feeling, symbol- 
ical observances, which have created it, have built windows 
in honor of God’s light, pinnacles that carry the eye of man 
unconsciously heavenward, and spires that are made 

“ to raise the heart and lead the will, 


By a bright ladder to the world above.” 

We build to the honor of God. Our work has its founda- 
tion in holiness. And as we lay that which is to receive the 
superstructure, it will yield results in harmony with our senti- 
ments; if we build reverentially, we must also build symbol- 
ically; therefore we do but follow 'in the footsteps of those 
who built so often in times long passed for the honor of 
God* 

As we look to them for our lessons in Church Architecture, 
and they are our best teachers, we must, not omit to study 
.and to build with the same feeling — the same devout and 
symbolical feeling — or we will never accomplish any good 
result, and our churches will stand as but “ labored quarries 
above ground," meaningless and irreverential piles. 


“ A Gothic church, in its perfection, is an exposition of the 
distinctive doctrines of Christianity, clothed upon with a ma- 
terial form ; and is, as Coleridge has more forcibly expressed 
it, 1 the petrifaction of our religion ;’ or, as it has been ex- 
pressed by a mind essentially differing from Coleridge’s, which 

° ” For other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Now 
if any man build upon this foundation, cold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble ; 
every man’s work shall lie made manifest : for the day shall declare it. because it 
shall he revealed by fire ; and the are shall try every man’s work, of what sort it is.” — 
1st Corinthians, iii. 12, 18. 


Digitized by Google 





ORIENTATION. 17 


makes the coincidence the more remarkable. The divine order 
and economy of the one seems to be emblematically set forth 
by the just, plain, and majestic architecture of the other ; and 
as the one consists of a great variety of parts united in the 
same regular design, according to the truest art and most 
exact proportion, so the other contains a decent subordination 
of members, various sacred institutions, sublime doctrines, and 
solid precepts of morality, digested into the same design and 
with an admirable concurrence tending to one view — the 
happiness and exaltation of human nature.”* 

Orientation was strictly observed in the erection of the 
Medieval Churches, with but few exceptions, and those are to 
be traced to remoter causes than a want of symbolical under- 
standing or rubrical obedience. The verge of a precipice, or 
the undulating line of a river’s margin, or some other natural 
or local difficulty, was a plausible reason for a deviation ; or 
ignorance of the precise cardinal points may have caused the 
slight inclination from the East observable in some counties. 
Atid I have yet to find the antiquary that would attribute 
these variations to an intended violation of rubric, or senti- 
ment, or usage. 

It is not so, I am pained to say, in the churches of the 
present time, and we do violate this venerable observance, 
which was one of the component principles in the develop- 
ment of the architecture we employ, with that same careless 
temerity with which churchmen omit the chancel, or substi- 
tute a table for the altar, which often loses its distinctive 
character, and from its unchurchlike position, has sometimes 
been desecrated and turned into a convenient cloak and hat 
stand. What irreverence ! 

° Poole’s Churches. 


3 


Digitized by Google 




18 INTRODUCTION. 


Sameness of design, and the want of picturesqueness — the 
very life of all Gothic work — characterize most modern struc- 
tures. The everlasting corner steeple, repeated wherever the 
eye chances to fall, multiplied in almost endless number for 
either of the four corners made by crossing streets, may be ; 
attributed, without injustice, to the authority of those who 
build more for mere architectural display than with a spirit 
of religious devotion. 

This degeneracy, so often observable in the first movement 
towards the erection of a church, should not be tolerated if 
we profess to build religiously, nor should we proceed further 
in the work, as that which is begun in irreverence cannot 
expect to meet with respect either from the heathen or the 
Christian. But 

“Unto the East we turn, to which belong 
More than the heart divines or eye descries.” 

! 

Keeping in view then, the same symbolical reason and 
also the same religious devotion with which the corner-stone 
of the Sanctuary was laid Easternmost, the next step in our 
progress will be to the development Westward of the 

. 

fllcin. 

i 

Our countrymen have already made progress in architect- 
j ure. There is intelligence enough to comprehend its mys- 
teries, and sufficient taste to embody them in our edifices. 

The latent capacity needs only to be developed by instruc- 
tion in its true principles, in order to restore the art to its 
! noble position. 

It would be an error to urge the introduction of Gothic 
Church Architecture upon any other basis, than that of its 


Digitized by Google 




PLAN. 19 


symbolical mcauing. True, little is as yet known of the sym- 
bolisms used every day in the very churches we build ; yet it 
does not follow that such symbolisms do not actually exist. 
The practice of adapting the Middle Age buildings to the 
present conventional forms of worship is prevalent among us : 
and these buildings require but little if any alteration to 
| accomplish this object. Yet they contain in themselves 
original symbolic forms and devices. The edifices and the 
j symbols are inseparable. The minutest, and so on to the 
grandest parts of their architecture, to those who have within 
them a religious feeling, aTe fitting emblems of the religion 
that created them. And if their architecture is appropriated 
to the use of modern worshippers, so do they unconsciously 
introduce its mysteries when they build their churches. 

“Gothic Architecture has always the charm of mystery; it 
does not exhibit itself naked and bare, like a Greek temple 
perched on a rock; but it appeals to the imagination, veiling 
itself with walls, and screens and towers; it delights in bold, 
striking, and picturesque irregularities, and always appears 
larger than its actual dimensions: the mouldings, the pillars, 
the arches, always create receding shadows, and to the eye, 
the idea of space arises from the succession of ideas.”* - 

Though the unique little church of Shottesbroke, (England) 
should be made the model for a new church in its vicinity or 
| elsewhere, its cruciform plan and trinal arrangement, adopted 
by the pious founders, as typical of Christ crucified and the 
Holy Trinity, would still remain symbolical, though a build- 
ing committee may have adopted the model without a spirit 

° Bardwell'H ‘‘Temple*.’’ 


Digitized by Google 




20 INTRODUCTION. 


of reverence, or in utter disregard of all its typical signi- 
fication. 

That church-building in this spirit is practised to a great 
extent, is not a matter of doubt, and the corollary is then 
that we do sometimes symbolize the Godhead, and sometimes 
the Crucifixion in the erection of our houses of worship, 
without knowing what we have done ! 

These common, every-day transactions are gross, though 
unwitting plagiarisms. Churches should be erected in honor 
of God, and the agents of the work be inspired with a senti- 
ment of truth. 

We might be guilty of a like larceny, in our ignorance, by 
appropriating the labors of Milton in the Paradise Lost, with- 
out ever having read more than his chapters of arguments, 
but simply for the reason that its plan came nearest to our 
own ideal of the groundwork of such an allegory. 

It does not necessarily follow, because the cruciform plan, 
from various circumstances, cannot always be adopted, that 
none others are as symbolical. Gothic art was created upon 
“ Theological, Ecclesiastical and Mystical” principles ; and 
whatsoever plan be adopted, whether it (is that which em- 
bodies the nave, chancel and sanctuary, or all of these with 
the addition of aisles, or this combination with the addition 
of transepts ; the ever-present symbol of the Holy Trinity 
will be found in them all ; that is “ the nave, being the 
commencement of the church, would in the language of the 
designer be read the Father, and being the first part, is of 
none. The chancel or cross (and which is as it were made 
to arise out of the nave) is of the nave alone, [as the Son 
from the Father :] and the holy of holies is of the nave and 



Digitized by Google 




FLAX. 


21 


of the chancel, proceeding from them.” [as the Spirit from 
the Father and Son.] 

When contemplating the building of a church, if at liberty 
to choose from either of the plans above named, there are 
many reasons why the cruciform should be uppermost in 
the mind. 

First; “According to human reason, the cross form should 
be the foundation for a house of prayer, because the religion 
of Christ crucified is to be preached within its walls ; and in 
conformity with this principle, a vast number of our churches 
have been so constructed, and wisely so too, for the essence 
of a subject should be its foundation and Christ crucified is 
the essence of our religion.” 

Second; the nave of a parish church should not exceed 
thirty feet in width, nor three squares of its width, or ninety 
feet, in length. I do not now of course refer to those in 
i modern times which are cathedral imitations. 

Then it is readily seen that when a greater number of 
parishioners are to be seated, not to overreach or mar what 
has been made pleasing and in good proportion and the most 
economical, more room must be had, and hence the addition 
! of aisle or aisles,* and the attendant beautiful nave piers and 
j their lofty arches ; and hence, also, if the nave be of a suf- 
ficient width, the pierced clear-story becomes a necessary 
and effective adjunct. Next, then, another alteration, for as 
good a reason, should be determined upon, and with as little 
loss as at first ; that is, transepts may be added, with or with- 

° Though the need of more apace for worshippers has been considered the origin of both 
aisle* and transept* in parish churches yet. there is other authority for accounting the 
ancient basilica to be the type of the Gothic cathedral. 


Digitized by Google 




I X T K () D U C T ION. 


out aisles, to accommodate the now increased number of 
parishioners. 

It will be seen that all of these alterations and additions 
have served to bring the constantly growing number of wor- 
shippers near to the pulpit and the chancel, which would not 

have been the case had additional accommodations for them 

I 

been obtained by a greater length of the nave. 

For the sake of economy and beauty, thirty feet in the 
width of a nave should not be exceeded, and ninety feet in 
length should not be exceeded, for the reasons that it would 
place the sittings too far from the chancel and mar the good 
proportion of the interior. Therefore, following the scheme 
of additions as above, the cruciform plan is preferable for a 
large congregation, to say nothing of its clear typical meaning 
and architectural beauty. See “ Design 4, Plate 2.” 

When it is consistent with the means at command, in a 
small church, the cruciform should take precedence of all 
other designs, for the reasons already specified in favor of it 
where a larger church is to be erected. See “Design 5, 
Plate 2.” 

The rood-tower is an important and peculiar feature in the 
plan and perspective of a cruciform design, and seems to have 
grown out of it, as a necessary appendage, though there are 
many old churches that have the rood-tower without the 
transverse arms of the cross. 

I I 

The plan including nave, transept and rood-tower was the 
most prevalent with the earliest Gothic architects, though 
there are instances in the same period in which the transepts 
and towers arc subsequent erections, or additions to the 


! original edifice. 



Digitized by Google 



PLAN. 


23 


Agreeably to this plan a greater elevation of steeple can 
be obtained with less difficulty and less expense, and certainly 
with as much claim to architectural beauty as in any other, 
since the exterior base of the tower, or its intersection with 
the roofs, is, at its commencement, already elevated above the 
surrounding building, and, with attention to good propor- 
tion — although confined to the width of the nave, as should 
always be the case — it will admit, as seen in perspective, a 
great elevation ; but it demands a corresponding lightness. 

i 

In Design 4 (Decorated) the clear-stories to the transepts 
have been omitted, as not being, in this design, actually 
essential to its architecture or usefulness. And this omission 
allows the first section of the tower to be appropriated as a ! 



lantern and ventilator to the central portion of the church. 
At the same time the second section serves as a belfry, as 


usual. 


In order to reduce in thickness, as much as possible, the 
main piers of support to the tower, it became necessary to 
omit the usual stone stair-case winding up in one of the piers 
to the belfry. The latter being used only as a belfry, and a 
visit to it being seldom required, it will need but little inge- 
nuity to reach it in case of necessity. 

The adoption of a rood-tower with its spire has been often 


i 




i 


objected to, even where it has been feasible and greatly to 


be desired ; for its piers and arches, which are generally re- 
quired to be made massive and heavy, obstruct the sight and 
produce too great a reverberation of sound. These would 
i be serious difficulties, in attempting to imitate the design of 
an ancient church, because of the custom prevalent of old of 
constructing the tower of smaller dimensions than the nave, 


Digitized by Google 





24 INTRODUCTION. 


and thereby bringing the piers necessary to the support of 
the tower several feet within the body of the church, at the 
same time diminishing the arch or opening between the 
i piers. 

In “ Design 5, Plate 2,” the tower is of the same width as 
the nave, and its walls receive support vertically upon seg- 
mental arches, thrown across the nave, chancel and transepts ; 
these again receive a lateral resistance in their respective 
walls, which stand as buttresses and afford us the strongest 
possible construction. In this manner, it will be observed, 
all impediments to the sight are removed, without the neces- 
sity of spoiling tower piers by curtailment or mutilation. 

In “ Design 4, Plate 2,” the piers are made comparatively 
small, and receive, for this diminution of support to the tower 
above, additional and greater strength in the adjoining arches 
of the aisles, carrying the lateral pressure also to the external 
walls, as in the “Design 5, Plate 2,” described in the pre- 
ceding paragraph. In this manner, slender and graceful 
piers, (in all cases built upon strong and proper foundations) 
may be made to answer the purpose of support equally as 
well, as massive and cumbrous piers without this additional 
lateral resistance. 

iltaterial. 

It would be a difficult matter here, within the limits to 
which this work is necessarily restricted, to particularize the 
various kinds and qualities of building materials that are 
necessary to the erection of a church, and to treat upon their 
relative merits. 

Wood, brick and stone all have good properties, though it 
is always advisable, in districts where stone can be procured, 


Digitized by Google 




MATERIAL. 25 


to employ it in preference to any other material. Its dura- 
bility, which depends much on its species, is not of less im- 
portance than its superiority over all other materials in pic- 
turesque appearance and architectural beauty. 

If the vicinity in which it is proposed to erect the church 
produces lime stone — its component parts being carbonate of 
lime, or the carbonates of lime and magnesia, nearly pure, and 
sometimes mixed with extraneous matter in various degrees — 
care should be taken to select that which is the most crystal- 
line in its composition, as it is the most durable, and least to 
be affected by atmospheric changes. 

Or, if sand stone abound — its component parts being quartz 
or silicious grains cemented by silicious, argillaceous, calcare- 
ous or other matter — its durability will depend upon the 
nature of the cementing substances, as its grains themselves 
are almost imperishable. 

Laminae are peculiar to sand stone, and, in its natural bed, 
their position is horizontal. If such stone be used with its 
laminae placed in a perpendicular position when built in the 
wall, it will decompose in flakes, according to the depth of 
the laminae ; but if placed in the wall, in its natural or hori- 
zontal position, the decomposition will be comparatively 
small. 

Variety of color and irregularity of strata, in all stones, are 
to be preferred, and should not be put aside for what some 
consider “handsome” — for smoothness, sameness in tint and 
want of a show of texture. 

In selecting stone for building purposes, greater attention 
should be given to its durability, and not so much to other 
considerations that are ever uppermost in a parsimonious 


4 


Digitized by Google 




26 


INTRODUCTION. 


j i 

mind. I think it will not be amiss to apply au English 
writer's remarks to our own country, seeing the daily and 
increasing carelessness shown in regal’d to the matters aud 
usages here briefly treated. 

He says, “ In modern Europe, and particularly in Great 
I Britain, there is scarcely a public building, of recent date, 
which will be in existence a thousand years hence. Many of 
the most splendid works of modern architecture are hastening 
to decay in what may be justly called the infancy of their 
existence, if compared with the date of public buildings that 
remain in Italy, in Greece, in Egypt and the East." 

As to the manner of working and laying the stone in the 
wall, I cannot do better, in expressing my own ideas upon 
this equally important subject, than to extract the following 
paragraphs of a foot note from the description of Trumping- 
tou Church in the “ Churches of Cambridgeshire.” 

“ No one can have failed to observe how seldom the ancient 
Gothic architects used either large stones or fine joints in 
their masonry. To fiud this peculiarity at a time when no 
cost was spared, and when the extreme delicacy of workman- 
ship in minor details was unsurpassed by that of any other 
age, is to convince us that it was not destitute of a sound 
practical reason. Modern builders boast of their superior 
skill and greater neatness of workmanship in these two 
respects. Compare for example the new buildings of King’s, 
S. John’s and Downing Colleges, with any ancient building, 
collegiate or ecclesiastical, and we shall see the most striking 
difference in the respective styles of masonry. The modern 
buildings are constructed of very large squared stones, with 
joints of almost imperceptible fineness; the ancient, of ham- 


Digitized by Google 



EX TRANCE. 27 


mer dressed ashlar with mortar a quarter of an inch thick be- 
tween every joint Downing College has now scarcely five 
square yards of masonry entire; everywhere the huge stones 
are rent and disjointed by the settlement of the foundations. 

In the new buildings of St. John’s, by far the greater part of 
the monolith window-sills are split in two, and in several 
places the stones have started or been shattered from the 
same cause.” 

“ The ancient masonry seems to have been designed to 
take into account those trifling settlements which are almost 
unavoidable, and which for the most part take place shortly 
after the erection of a building, often before the mortar has 
become hard. 

It is remarkable that the Tower of Trumpington has suf- 
fered much internally by the disruption of the fine-jointed 
stones from settlements. The attention of architects should 
be directed to this subject ; because if we mistake not, the 
ancient had three important advantages over the modern i 
masonry, viz. (1) a much better appearance ; (2) greater co- 
hesiveness; (3) it cost one third less. We are aware that 
some late Gothic buildings, as King’s College chapel, violated 
' (and with impunity) the more ancient principle ; and on the 
other hand, that many edifices built on the old system have 
suffered from settlements. We speak of course, only of 
general practice.” 

^Entrance. 

In what has thus far been written, there may be objections 
raised by the reader to the introduction of matter, that in 
juxtaposition with the conventionalities of the present time 


Digitized by Google 




28 INTRODUCTION. 


may be thought too controversial for an instructive work, as 
this purports to be. All 1 can offer in extenuation is that it 
was the intention, from the commencement, to find fault with 
and condemn all those things in the architecture* and build- 
ing of our parish churches that were most glaringly defective, 
and afterwards to endeavor to make the corrections most in 

0 “ Architecture is the art which bo disposes and adorns the edifices raised by man 
for whatsoever uses, that the sight of them contribute to his mental health, power, and 
pleasure. 

It is very necessary, in the outset of all inquiry, to distinguish carefully between 
Architecture and Building. 

To build, literally to confirm, is by common understanding to put together and adjust 
the several pieces of any edifice or receptacle of a considerable size. Thus we have 
church building, house building, ship building, and coach building. That one edifice 
stands, another floats, and another is suspended on iron springs, makes no difference in 
the nature of the art, if so it may be called, of building or edification. The persona 
who profess that art, are severally builders, ecclesiastical, naval, or of whatever other 
name their work may justify ; but building does not become architecture merely by the 
stability of what it erects ; and it is no more architecture which raises a church, or which 
fits it to receive and contain with comfort a required number of persons occupied in cer- 
tain religious offices, than it is architecture which makes a carriage commodious, or a 
ship swift. I do not, of course, mean that the word is not often, or even may not lie 
legitimately, applied in such a sense (as we speak of naval architecture) ; but in tliat 
sense architecture ceases to lie one of the fine arts, and it is therefore better not to run 
the risk, by loose nomenclature, of the confusion which would arise, and lias often arisen, 
from extending principles which belong altogether to building, into the sphere of archi- 
tecture proper. 

Let us therefore at once confine the name to that art which, taking up and admitting 
as conditions of its working, the necessities and common uses of the building, impresses 
on its form certain characters venerable or beautiful, but otherwise unnecessary. Thus I 
suppose, no one would call the laws architectural which determine the height of a breast- 
work or the position of a bastion. But if to the stone facing of that bastion be added an 
unnecessary feature, as a cable moulding, thal is architecture. It would be similarly un- 
reasonable to call battlements or machicolations architectural features, so long as they 
consist only of an advanced gallery supported on projecting masses, with open intervals 
beneath for offence. 

But if these projecting masses be cured beneath into rounded courses, which are useless, 
and if the headings of the intervals Ik? arched and trefoiled, which is useless, that is archi- 
tecture. It may not be always easy to draw the line so sharply and simply ; because there 
arc few buildings which have not some pretence or color of being architectural ; neither 
can there Ik? any architecture which is not liosed on building, nor any good architecture 
which is not based on good building ; but it is perfectly easy and very necessary, to keep 
the ideas distinct, and to understand fully that Architecture concerns itself only with those 
characters of an edifice which arc above and beyond its common use. I say common ; 
because a building raised to the honor of God. or in memory of men. has surely a use to 
which its architectural adornment fits it ; but not a use which limits, by any inevitable 
necessities, its plan or details.'' — Buskin. 


Digitized by Google 




ENTRANCE. 29 


accordance with a true taste and right mode of building, and 
in this manner to bring about a truer perception of things 
architectural both among wardens and vestrymen and those 
commissioned by them to undertake any new and important 
work. 

It would have been an endless and perhaps an ungrateful 
task, to undertake a revision or criticism of all the errors 
that have crept into common practice, the toleration of which 
is an indignity to a cause so holy as that of church building. 
And that there might be a proper limit to this “ Introduc- 
tion,” with the deficiencies supplied, as far as practicable, in 
the accompanying designs, the author confines his animadver- 
sions to those particulars in which common sense will be ready 
always to sustain him. 

It is only by noting these errors, and holding a correct 
system before the public eye, that great and long-continued 
abuses can be conquered, and reformations in art effected. 
As the schoolboy becomes versed in his elementary studies, 
so will he be better able to proceed to more profound and 
difficult themes ; and I await patiently the time when our 
countrymen, like the schoolboy, shall be better fitted to 
prosecute the higher studies of art, and appreciate its de- 
[ i velopment. 

“ Ye who build the churches of the Lord, 

See that ye make the western portals low : 

Let no one enter who disdains to bow.” 

One of the most serious faults, both in the exterior and 
interior composition of a design — not to speak of other faults 
that must necessarily follow — is that of introducing doorways 
for ornament or relief (as the architect, in designing an Italian 
villa, would make a blank, to preserve the uniformity or equi- 
librium of a composition in this style,) and running up the 


Digitized by Google 




30 INTRODUCTION. 

doorway beyond the height required for good proportion or 
actual necessity, to the detriment, or sometimes total exclu- 
sion of the more useful window, whose place in the design it 
usurps. 

It is an ugly fashion, and without any just excuse, to make 
a door fifteen feet in height, when a rose window, immediately 
above it, must be reduced to but five feet in diameter that it 
may not be crushed in the angle of the gable, a practice 
which seems strange too, just at the time when the “ dim re- 
ligious light” of our Gothic interiors is so much disparaged. 

Mr. Wightwick,* in his animadversions upon this defect in 
continental buildings, says, “ Why is it a virtue in the door- 
ways of the foreign cathedrals to be gigantic, while the 
gigantic of English windows is a fault ? Why is the humble 
worshipper, ‘ small and of no reputation,’ to be admitted 
through a vast door ; while the universal light of great heaven 
may not shine through a vast window, — unless it be a circu- 
lar one? ********* 

“ It is one of the peculiar beauties of the English cathedral 
fronts that the great windows symbolize the pervading ex- 
pansion of the light of Truth, while the small doors typify the 
humility of truth’s seeker. 

“ The great window is to the honor of God ; the little door 
for the use of man." 

The common expression, when adverting to the merits of 
such or such a chnrch, that “it mimics a cathedral,” is first 
forced from us ns we observe the multiplicity of doorways 
that, in the small church, have sensibly lost their occupation; 
but which in the cathedral or larger church are required for 

c Weale'n Quarterly Paper* on Architerture. 


Digitized by Google 




CHANCEL. 31 


the ingress and egress of the multitudinous assemblage. This 
inconsistency has, in the following designs, been kept in view, 
and the number of doors is made to conform as nearly as pos- 
sible to the number of sittings in the church. 

All doorways that are in common use should have porches 
with exterior doors to protect the worshipper from the in- 
clemencies of the weather, and those of the interior should 
be hung on pivots, that they may not disturb him in his devo- 
tions. In this manner, will be avoided anomalies in the shape 
of the port-cocherc, minus the roadway, with its slender piers 
and delicate arches — beauties not wanted here — and then, 
also, we may dispense with the green baize doors and their 
glazed bull’s-eye apertures, fixtures so common to the porter- 
house and so inappropriate to the church, which yet, as is 
generally the case with tilings most objectionable, are in 
requisition the greater part of the year. 

The sacristy may serve, from necessity, the use of a porch 
to the chancel, in a small church ; but in a large one — and, 
indeed, in a small one also if possible — it seems advisable to 
make this porch with a parvise over it, and appropriate the 
latter to the ancient purpose of a sacristy ; it may be ap- 
proached by a stone newel staircase in the wall ; see “ Design 
6, Plate 2.” 

t£l)ancd. 

In the brief historical notice of Gothic architecture that 
heads this chapter, I have said that “ the Church architecture 
of England, can have no true existence under a system foreign 
to her own.” That English Gothic architecture was originated 
and supported by the religious belief coeval with it, may be 
readily proved by tracing (as I have attempted very simply 


Digitized by Google 




32 


INTRODUCTION. 



and summarily to do in that notice) the history of its pedi- 
gree from its birth to the downfall of art. 

Is this the belief of churchmen, vestries and architects of 
the established church of England, who build churches “ to 
the honor and glory of God ?” 

Do not the canons of the primitive church now exist? And 
have not the usages founded on them a place in the hearts of 
those who look to the past for their great exemplars of piety 
and religious devotion? And how is it reconcilable, then, to 
preserve the one with reverence, and mar the religious as 
well as the architectural beauties of the other ? 

That churchmen do not believe, when they search the 
depths of their hearts, that “ the Church architecture of Eng- 
land, can have no true existence under a system foreign to her 
own," it would be illiberal to dispute, though their practice 
falls far short of their belief. 

There are churches built without chancels, but with spaces 
inclosed in the nave by railing, and called chancels. In these 
it requires a liberal imagination to discern the symbolism 
which separates the church triumphant and the chnrch 
militant 

Some substitutes for chancels are apsidal spaces with the 
segment of a circle for their contour, and others there are 
that can, with architectural propriety, and it is to be hoped 
without irreverence, be compared only to huge sentry boxes 
flattened against the nave wall from without. Such abor- 
tions become better the edifices of any other society than 
those of the Church of England, and her daughter in this 
country. 

In theory, the Chancel rises out of the naos or nave, and 
the Sanctuary proceeds from the nave and chancel, and they 


Digitized by Google 



CHANCEL. 33 


cannot remain one within the other, if their typical meaning 
be preserved, but must be distinct in form, and be as perfect 
as the hand of man can make them, that they may be the 
more significant in character and worthy of divine acceptance. 
“ What indeed is there — to drop for a time all considerations 
of ecclesiastical propriety and rubrical obedience, and to view 
the matter as a simple question of taste — what is there that 
the resources of the most ingenious architect can devise, 
which will compensate, in either internal or external appear- 
ance, for deficiency of length in a Chancel? We are bold to 
answer unhesitatingly, there is nothing; a stinted Chancel 
must ruin a Church.”* 

In many of the early churches the chancel and nave were 
covered by roofs in the same plane, and sometimes without 
having the great distinguishing feature, the chancel arch. 
In these instances, however, the elevation of the chancel floor 
above the nave, as well as the beautiful chancel screen, made 
“to check the irreverent approach to the solemn mysteries 
which are celebrated at the Christian altar,” designates its 
position and its holy uses at once. 

The screen, or cancelli, from which the name chancel is 
derived, may be of wood or stone, and will not only admit 
of great beauty of design and diversity of ornament, but was 
often, in old churches, covered with brilliant coloring and 
gilding. 

The chancel arch, from its conspicuous position, should be 
turned to the best account, and, with ornaments and symbols, 
may ever suggest to the mind of the beholder some funda- 
mental doctrine of the Church. Texts from Scripture, and 

° Architectural description of 8. Andrew's Church, Histon. “Churches of Cam- 
bridgeshire." 


5 


Digitized by Google 




1 34 

INTRODUCTION. 

1 

1 



devices, in old churches, are found inscribed and carved in 
every possible place. But I am now speaking of the chancel 
arch, and of their application to this particular part of the 
church. 

In the chancel arch of the beautiful little restored church 
of St. Mary’s, Wymeswold, England, “ The capitals and drip- 
stone ends are emblematical. On the south side is a blinded 
figure with her crown falling, representing the synagogue — 
the capital being a cluster of dry vine branches. On the 
north is an erect crowned figure, representing the Church — 
the capital, a cluster of vine branches bearing fruit.” 

The parclose differs from the screen, inasmuch as the former 
is more particularly employed for the separation or protection 
of a chapel or other portion of the church from the nave or 
chancel ; and, in “ Design 4, Plate 2,” both the Sacristy and 
organ chapel are separated from the nave and chancel in this 
manner; in most of the remaining designs, the organ chapel 
has a pnrclose both in the chancel and in the nave. 

As the designs show more particularly the arrangements 
and proportions of the chancel, it would be needless here to 
specify them, and I would advise, in lieu thereof, a minute 
examination of the designs. 

To those accustomed to look upon the chancel, with its 
numerous north and south windows, and the flood of light 
they transmit, an apology or rather reasons may be expected 
for studiously omitting all notice of these north and south 
windows in the designs. 

First, we would dispense with these windows because, the 
great eatst window can always be made to answer the required 
purpose — admission of sufficient light. 

Second, cross lights are objectionable in the interior of this 


Digitized by Google 







GALLERY. 

36 


portion of the church : the chancel is as it were a picture, 
with its background, and must receive the proper touches of 
light and shade, as painters 

“ Permit no two conspicuous lights to shine 
With rival radiance in the same design.” 

Third, where the walls are less pierced, as surveyed, from 
without, the mysteries of the chancel seem more profoundly 
veiled and reserved ; and the loss of exterior relief is of less 
moment than the fine effect produced in the interior by the 
admission of light from but a single direction. 

&lt;&amp;allcrg. 

The personal sacrifices made by the churchmen of bygone 
times, now almost entirely forgotten, and the religious rever- 
ence. with which all things pertaining to the house of God, 
and requisite in their tnode of worship, were held by them, 
remain in bright and immortal contrast with the dark trans- 
actions of their persecutors, in the demolition of so many 
churches which stood as noble monuments of our forefathers’ 
self-denial, faith and zeal. 

Love of luxury seems to have waited upon the new order 
of things, and profanity strove to rid itself of every obstacle 
to indulgence and every inconvenience that obstructed its 
repose. Sacrifices had been made, with sincere and holy 
motives, for the erection of churches to the honor of God. 
Now a love of worldly things returned. Divine charity 
yielded to a prevalent and hateful selfishness, which it had 
been long used to repress. Magnificent monumental piles, 
reared for the worship of God, and as fit emblems of a devo- 
tional sacrifice which inspired beholders with reverence for 


Digitized by Google 




36 INTRODUCTION. 


Him and sympathy with human self-denial were now turned 
to base uses of the earth. The tread of daring sacrilege 
defiled God’s sanctuary. An impious covetousness diverted 
and appropriated his treasures An insane jealousy defaced 
works of art hallowed by ages. Church after church was 
desecrated in the march of fanaticism. And only the ruins 
of many a goodly edifice remain to attest the riots of pro- 
fanity and the barbarism of ignorance. 

To speak at present of but one of the many perversions : 
the beautiful western tower arch that, curved in grace and 
airy lightness, performed its office of support, was rudely filled 
up with a huge, hideous singing gallery ; and this wretched, 
anomalous invention has beeu bequeathed to us, with other 
displacements and deformities, as one of the specimens of the 
ill taste prevalent during the Puritan reformation, when re- 
ligious violence had reached a lamentable ascendency. 

Happy is it that this deformity is receiving the attention it 
justly merits ; and I hope, ere another century rolls around, 
that it may disappear and be forgotten ; not solely on account 
of its unarchitectural character, introducing discord among 
all graceful lines with which it comes in contact, but that we 
may get rid of its ugly appendages, curtains, brass rods and 
rattling rings, furnishing a screen behind which, as is too 
familiarly known, levity finds place for its profaning prac- 
tices. 

There are also other as grave reasons calling for its re- 
moval. The choristers, to conform to the designs of a Liturgy, 
should be in or near to the chancel, convenient to the congre- 
gation who are to unite in the songs of praise, and whom the 
choristers are intended to assist, and not to be placed behind 
or over them, often really acting as a separate body of worship- 


Digitized by Google 



GALLERY. 


37 


pers, and seemingly usurping the exclusive right to chant the 
Church’s psalmody. The removal of this illegitimate gallery 
will tend, also, to the restoration of those parts of the church 
which are completely obliterated by its presence. 

A novelty and excrescence, it introduced others as excep- 
tionable with it, and the tower vestibule was necessarily 
formed by the cutting in two as it were of that most elegant 
appendage to the nave of a church, the lofty tower arch, with 
its deep, effective, shadowy recess. 

The magnificent window that filled the west end of the 
church with a 

“ bright radiance and collateral light,” 

and 

“ Casements through which the sunset streams like sunrise” 

were therefore foiled in their purpose, robbed of their utility, 
and hidden away from sight by the massive organ, only the 
back of which, and the narrow spaces around it, could be 
gilded by the sun’s variegated rays. 

To such foreign uses, after the Reformation, which is always 
associated with the decadence of art, were many noble and 
useful members of edifices applied. Windows were blocked 
up, apparently that they might keep in darkness those who 
worshipped under them. 

Countless marks of worldliness and destructive violence 
disfigured the places where the cross had been sacredly in- 
stalled, teaching a lesson of devotion and self-sacrifice to men 
that shall be judged by their works. 

A propitious time has arrived, when we should repudiate 
the errors of the ancestry that has entailed upon us such abor- 
tions, and shake ourselves from the subserviency that has so 
long bound us to those errors, lest they be perpetuated and 


Digitized by Google 




38 INTRODUCTION. 


in turn transmitted to our descendants, making us parttcipes 
crimitiia with their ungodly originators. 

The total exclusion of the gallery, and the setting apart of 
an “ organ chapel ” on the floor of the church, are peculiari- 
ties of all of the designs in this volume. And the restoration 
to their proper uses of the west window and the tower arch 
with its slender pier shafts and graceful archivolt moldings, 
forms one of the principal features in “ Design 6, Plate 5,” and 
should be considered as important to the good effect of an 
interior at the west end as the proper depth of the chancel at 
the east is ; a lengthened nave, enhancing the vista, con- 
tributes vastly to the beauty of the interior perspective in a 
church, an effect which can only be obtained by removing 
the obstructing gallery from its usurped place. 

fJcto. 

The earlier orthography of this word is pite, and it signified 
any open seat. In ancient churches, the worshippers occu- 
pied simply low wooden seats with wainscoting between them, 
sometimes reaching to the ground, and at others only as far 
down as the seat, with the ends partially inclosed and appro- 
priately paneled, or simply with chamfered angles, and, 
though often with plain horizontal cap moldings, sometimes 
enriched with elaborate finials, that “ formed an avenue along 
which the eye was irresistibly directed towards the altar.” 

The inclosed pew of three centuries ago, still correspond- 
ing somewhat with the modern pew, is supposed to have 
originated with the Puritans, and, with the gallery, which 
was sometimes a pew as well, was a production, like many 


Digitized by Google 




PEW. 39 


others of the same nature, necessary to satisfy the animal man 
of the times and conduce in form and adornment as much as 
possible to his convenience and pleasure, during his religious 
devotions. 

Pews of their time were made lofty and spacious, and cur- 
tained, that the occupants might avoid the “order to bow at 
the name of JESUS, and the rule to stand at the Gloria Patri.” 

Special entrances to those occupied by the lord of the 
manor, or other high functionaries, are not uncommonly 
found, in old churches, pierced recklessly through gorgeous 
traceried and painted windows or other elaborate work, atid 
their interiors were bedecked with gaily colored Brussels 
carpets and furnished with arm-chairs, hat-stands and fire- 
places. 

With all the utilitarianism and parsimony that attend too 
often the erection of many of our parish churches at this late 
day, there are to be found among us as great inconsistencies 
and expensive absurdities as those which marked a less en- 
lightened age, and these will, in future times, be held up to 
the same derision as the hat-stand and fire-place of the Puri- 
tans are at the present day. 

High-backed pues, with their occupants in them, remind us 
of those Roman martyrs in the year one thousand eight hun- 
dred and forty-nine, found buried to their necks in the ground ; 
and their doors, alike expensive and unnecessary, unless to 
proclaim the selfishness of the occupant, are things not now 
to be encouraged in the erection of a new church, where any 
spirit of correct taste or appreciation of the true character of 
God’s house is to be found. 

In “Design 2, Plate 8, Fig. 6,” and “Design 4, Plate 7, 
Fig. 10," are drawn the proper forms for seat-ends, suitable 


Digitized by Google 




40 INTKODUCTION. 


to the several designs; they may be plain or ornamented with 
paneling or other work in concord with the respective styles 
of the churches in which they may be used. 

3Utar. 

For a brief account of the origin of the stone altar, the fol- 
lowing extract, taken from “ Poole’s Churches,” will not prove 
uninteresting. 

“ The circumstances out of which the use of stone altars 
arose were these : — In the earliest ages of the Church, Chris- 
tians were obliged to retire to the catacombs to solemnize the 
rites of the faith. In these were buried many of the martyrs ; 
and their tombs presented themselves as the most commo- 
dious, and, what was infinitely more valued, the most sacred 
spots on which to consecrate the Eucharist. 

“ The affections of the Christian people clung to these sol- 
emn assemblies and sacred altars ; and after they might choose 
the place and manner of their service, they erected altars as 
much as might be, resembling those at which they had wor- 
shipped in the days of their persecution. They chose, there- 
fore, very often, the spot on which some martyr had received 
his crown ; and his tomb being erected on the place, furnished 
the altar of a Christian church.” 

| 

The communion table, after the Reformation, generally oc- 
cupied the same position as that of the ancient altar, against 
the east wall ; but it caused great dissatisfaction among the 
Puritans, who, when in power, either drew it out into the 
nave, or changed its position to the centre of the chancel, 
and placed seats around it for the communicants. At a sub- 
sequent period, it was restored to its ancient place; though 


Digitized by Google 




ALTAR. 41 


in some instances, the former position in the middle of the 
chancel is still preserved. 

The easternmost part of the chancel receives its appellation 
of “ The Sanctuary” from its containing the high altar, at 
which the ceremonies of the Holy Eucharist are performed. 
It should be elevated not less than one step above the chaucel 
floor, nor more than three ; and the material used in its floor 
should differ from that of the chancel, and be more costly, 
to mark it as “ the holy of holies,” and as superior to all 
other parts of the church in its material as it is in its spiritual 
character. 

44 Enter : its grandeur overwhelms thee not ; 

And why ? it is not lessen’d ; but thy mind, 

Expanded by the genius of the spot, 

Has grown colossal, and can only find 
A fit abode wherein appear enshrined 
Thy hopes of immortality ; and thou 
Shalt one day, if found worthy, so defined, 

See thy God face to face, as thou dost now 
His Holy of Holies, nor be blasted by his brow.* 

There seems more fitness in an altar of stone, if we view it 
with an eye to symbolism, which should always be present 
in our minds in whatever we build to the honor and glory 
of God, that it may the more readily speak its uses and 
purposes. 

“ It ought to be of stone, not because of the hardness, but 
the solidity of faith. Just as the Lord said unto Peter, 1 Thou 
art Peter, and upon this rock’— that is, upon this firmness of 
. faith — ‘I will build ray church.’ ” 

In chancels whose dimensions will admit of it, the altar 
appears more properly and to a better advantage if removed 
a few feet from the easternmost wall, though, in most of the 
designs here presented, it would not be expedient. In these 




Digitized by Google 



42 INTRODUCTION. 


designs, the altar is placed, agreeably to the present practice, 
against the wall. 

There will be always, if the chancel is of a proper propor- 
tion, sufficient space on either side of the altar, against the 
east wall, for the creed and commandments ; but in no 
instance, should a reredos, if determined upon to receive 
these inscriptions, be suffered to be elevated above the sill 
of the great east window; the reasons are too obvious to 
need specification. 

Scbilici. 

The stone seats found in ancient churches, near to the 
altar, and generally in the wall, on the south side of the chau- 
] cel, have been the cause of much discussiou as to their origi- 
nal use. They varied in number, from one to four, and were 
separately niched in the wall and elaborately ornamented 
with tabernacle work, buttresses and other designs. Some- 
times the seat, sufficient to accommodate two or three priests, ! ! 
was spanned by one arch or canopy, which was, as well as 
others of a different form, quite plain and devoid of orna- 
ment. 

The subject of their use was long contested by archseolo- i 
gists, who now seem to have arrived at the truth that they 
were used as seats for the officiating priests. 

In many parish churches of the present day, the stalls with 
very elaborate canopies peculiar to the cathedral choir, are 
used ns a substitute for sedilia, giving to the interior of the 
chancel a cabinet-furniture-wareroorn appearance, cumbering 
it to a very objectionable extent and diminishing its pro- 
portions. 


Digitized by Google 




PISCINA. — FONT. 43 


Limited in their dimensions at the outset, few chancels can 
bear this additional contraction. 

The sedilia as above described, corresponding in simplicity 
or decoration with the means of the parish, are greatly to be 
preferred, not only for the relief they afford to the otherwise 
naked south wall of the chancel, but because they leave the 
chancel unincumbered, so that it may be seen in all its broad 
expanse of beauty. 

Piscina. 

The piscina is usually found in the south wall, and almost 
always adjoins the sedilia on the east. Yet it is often found, 
in old churches, in the east wall, and other parts near by 
where altars are or have been. It is used to receive the 
water after rinsing the chalice and washing the priest’s hands 
at the conclusion of the celebration of the Holy Eucharist. 

Its position should be at a convenient distance above the 
floor of the sanctuary, and the niche or fenestella be so formed 
as to receive the credence shelf, either of wood or stone 
placed above the bason of the piscina, which may thus answer 
a double purpose, and enable us to dispense with a separate 
credence table or prothesis, though the latter was more com- 
mon in earlier ages. 

Jfbnt. 

The font is susceptible of great variety of design and deco- 
ration. It is rarely the case, in ancient examples, that two 
fonts are found alike, notwithstanding the constant intercourse 
kept up between the architects of the middle ages. 

The plan of the bason was most commonly that of the 


Digitized by Google 




44 INTRODUCTION. 


hexagon, heptagon or octagon, raised upon shafts of an end- 
less variety, though the circular bason upon a simple shaft or 
block, and often too, of the rudest description, was peculiar 
to the Norman churches. The bason was always large enough 
to admit of the immersion of the infant, its interior averaging 
one foot in depth by about two feet in diameter, comparing 
strangely with the pigmy scoops that now adorn the chancel 
arch of so many of our churches, and which prevent the possi- 
bility of complying with the rubric or the parent’s wish when 
total immersion is desired. 

“ The heptagon is even less common than the hexagon for 
fonts ; and its shape would be least of all adapted to the font, 
according to the symbolical meaning of the different numerals, 
with the elder theological writers ; for seven signifies perfec- 
tion, whereas the font is the instrument of initiation. 

“ And now we arrive at the octagon, the most appropriate 
form for the font, and the most beautiful as well as the most 
ecclesiastical; for the octagon is not only a very graceful 
form, and very favorable to the reception of sculpture on its 
several faces; but is also in itself, according to the ancient 
method of spiritualizing numbers, symbolical of the new birth 
in baptism ; for the seven days’ creation of the natural world 
are symbolized by the number seven ; and the new creation 
by Christ Jesus, by the number eight, in allusion to the eighth 
day, on which he rose again from the dead. 

“ And this reason St. Ambrose, more than fourteen centuries 
ago, assigned for the octagonal form of the baptistery.”* 

The material used in the construction of the font is not to 
be questioned, provided it is truthful and the best the parish 

» ° Poole’i •* Churches.” 


Digitized by Google 




FONT. 45 


can afford. Stone is to be preferred, but wooden fonts lined 
with lead, where it is wished to avoid too great an outlay, are 
certainly more desirable than the plaster of Paris vases and 
pedestals that would find fitter place in t a garden or show- 
man’s window. 

Beside the many deformities and anomalies in decoration 
exhibited in the fonts of the present day, when ignorance and 
ill taste are so manifest in the erection of parish churches, 
there is nothing more deserving of criticism than the impro-* 
priety of the position commonly assigned to the font, not to 
speak of the violation of its typical intent. It is sometimes 
improperly placed on a step of the chancel, or in the nave 
near the chancel, in the vista of the long central alley, as if 
for the admiration of the parishioners, or as a souvenir of the 
munificence to which it owes its existence ; it is thus made a 
conspicuous object perchance diverting attention from the 
religious services, and a stumbling-block for the communicant 
in his passage to the chancel. 

The font should be placed at the entrance of a church ; or, 
if there be a west door, at the extreme west end of the nave 
or aisle ; because baptism is the entrance to the spiritual 
church, as the door is the way into the material church. 
When the font is not in use, its sanctity should be protected 
from rudeness and foulness by a cover conforming in style to 
the rest of its architecture. 

When the seats at the west end of the south aisle can be 
dispensed with, it seems peculiarly appropriate to set apart 
that portion of the aisle formed by one compartment of the 
nave arches, inclosed with proper railing, of wood or stone, 
ns the baptistery or receptacle of the font, marking it as sacred , ' 
and preserving it from profane handling. 


Digitized by Google 




40 INTRODUCTION. 


- J?ulpit. 

In the Refectory of St. Marie’s Abbey, Beaulieu, England,* 
there is a unique stone pulpit, approached by stone steps in 
a pierced arcade in the thickness of the wall, which is often 
described, and justly too, as the beau ideal of a pulpit. There 
are seventeen stone steps leading to its platform, elevating it 
I .about seven feet above the ground floor, which, together with 
its deeply arched recess, its small shafts and their elegantly 
turned archivolt moldings, and the noble character given to 
the approach, certainly make it worthy of study and ad- 
miration. 

Its architectural character is classed as that of early Deco- 
rated, though it seems to be much earlier. Stone pulpits of 
this period were not common, and the finest ancient examples 
now existing are those of Perpendicular date; at this last 
period, wooden pulpits abounded, and many fine specimens 
still remain. 

The stone pulpit of the Refectory, above described, is cited 
as a specimen, that its manner of design and construction may 
stir our emulation to rival its beauties, and greatly to improve 
upon our present mode of designing pulpits and their ap- 
proaches. 

Although it is desirable that the pulpit should be of stone, 
the least perishable of all building material, yet it might be 
deemed an inconsistency to advise its use in the designs con- 
| tained in this volume, to the exclusion of wood. The prin- 
I ciple of having every thing the best of its kind that we can 
afford, will not be attained until we build more in accordance 

0 Beautifully illustrated in •• Wcalr'a Quarterly Paper* on Architecture." 


Digitized by Google 




PULPIT. 47 


with our circumstances, and dare publish the practice to the 
world by our works. 

If twenty thousand dollars, the amount of ready money 
which a parish may possess or subscribe, will erect an unos- 
tentatious church, in the early English style, with chancel- 
screen, doors and seats of veritable oak, and font and pulpit 
of carved stone, and the windows with their symbolical 
painted glass from the best artist’s hands; it is truly more 
honest, more churchmanlike and more consistent with the 
dignity of architecture, than to build the same proposed 
church in the elaborate Decorated style, with altar, pulpit, 
chancel-screen and doors of pine, grained in imitation of what 
they should be, and costing in the end the same amount of 
money. Nay, the evils of this ambitious hypocrisy do not 
always end here ; it is too common to find the church at its j 
completion, greatly involved in debt, a constant drain upon 
the parish resources, and a fit subject for Sunday alms-begging 
sermons ; while it stands as a monument of untruths, a preacher 
of falsehood in wood and stone. Therefore I say, if, taking 
all these things into consideration, a stone pulpit cannot be 
afforded, one of veritable pine, or cedar or oak can be, and 
ought to be chosen. 

Wo unto those who, extending the Christian church with 
zeal, to promulgate the Truths of the Gospel, contradict their 
divine Lord’s lessons by their practice, and surround them- 
selves by meretricious illusions and gorgeous falsehoods ! 

The polygonal form seems to be the best, and is that most 
peculiar to the ancient pulpit. Its position should be on the 
nave wall, with steps leading to it from the sacristy; or 
against a nave pier, with steps winding partly around its base. 

At the same time, great care should be had so to place it, in 


Digitized by Google 




48 INTRODUCTION. 


relation to the parishioners, that they may all see and hear 
the preacher, without the difficulties of which they so often 
justly complain. 

The “sounding board,” the name by which a species of 
covering over the pulpit is known, merits no notice here, 
unless to be disapproved. “ Nothing is beautiful which has 
not some good and useful end.” Its want of utility condemns 
it, without reference to the toy-like appearance it gives to 
the pulpit. 

According to the principles of acoustics, and particularly 
in that which teaches the reflection of sound, it is obvious 
theoretically that the sounding board does not answer its 
intended purpose, but serves, as a simple trial will practically 
prove, to reflect the voice of the speaker downward in the 
vicinity of his nearest hearers, to the disadvantage of those 
at a distance. The plain rule, “ that the angle of reflection 
is always equal to the angle of incidence,” explains this fact 
without further argument. 

The sounding board is an invention of that period when 
the study of science and the practice of art seemed for a time 
suspended, and it is one of the many meaningless appendages 
to a church that have been bequeathed to us by an age 
of error. 

The ancient architects always held in reverence this great 
fundamental principle of their art — that ornament should ever 
be made subservient and accessory to the thing adorned, and 
not that things should be created for the sake of displaying 
embellishments. 

Illumination in gilt and colors was a great medium, in their 
hands, of giving increased effect to devices and ornaments; 
but as they did not devise unnecessary subjects for the exhi- 


Digitized by Googl 



LECTERN. 49 


bition of skill in ornamentation, neither did they invent orna- 
ment, crosses or other designs, for the sake of illumination ; 
and where ornament and devices and crosses did not exist, as 
in panels, on shields, or other surfaces, no attempt was made 
to illumine or paint without the pre-existing object. If there 
be any reason in this revered principle, it is as much an 
anomaly in art to paint a cross or ornament in imitation, for 
the sake of the illumination, or for the relief that may be de- 
sired, as it would be to paint a door or a window on a wall 
for the purpose of producing an equilibrium in the architect- 
ural design. Let us then conclude to eschew in our new 
works, all attempt at painting and gilding altars, fonts and 
pulpits, if the monograms, or crosses, or ornaments do not exist 
in alto-relievo and in this manner call for the illumination. 

Architecture can only exist where light and shade are real. 
Painting usurps the place of architecture when it is used as a 
means of decoration ; it is only of utility in architecture when 
it beautifies or gives more expression to forms, 

Cectcrn. 

The lectern or lettern, like a great many other beautiful 
and appropriate appointments in the service of the ancient 
Church, if not entirely forgotten, fell into general disuse, 
during the space of time between the decline of art and its 
revival. And then the ponderous pulpit, with its reading 
desk, stationed in the midst of the nave alley, shut out the 
view of the chancel and assumed an air of more importance 
than the altar itself. 

There are three forms in which the ancient lectern was 
generally made, and which varied with its position ; that with 
upright front and one inclining board ; that with two inclin- 


1 


Digitized by Google 




50 

. INTRODUCTION. 




ing book boards; and that where four book boards incline 
pyramidally to the apex ; made either revolving or stationary 

k 

upon a center shaft, and all admitting of great variety of 
architecture. 

There is also another and very appropriate symbolical form ; ! 

that of the eagle or pelican raised upon a slender shaft and 
pedestal, with outstretched wings to receive the book. It 
should be made of metal, which from its strength admits of 
greater delicacy and lightness of form than any other material, 
aud therefore interposes less obstruction between the eye and 
the chancel. A lectern of the latter form is better adapted 
to larger churches than those here treated of — to churches 
where there are more priests than oue officiating. 

A lectern with two book boards, one for the lessons, looking 
west, and the other for the prayer-book, looking east, is more 
suitable for smaller or parish churches: and its proper posi- 
tion is in the body of the church, placed to the north or south 
of the middle passage of the nave ; that the priest in reading 
the lessons may look towards the people, and with them, may 
likewise face the east in prayer. 

vUarming anil Ventilating. 

The condemnation so frequently and lavishly expressed by 
scientific men, and also by those who are better able to find 
fault than make corrections, touching the modern mode of 
warming and ventilating churches, is too generally visited 
upon the architect, disparaging his judgment, carefulness, or 
good intentions, and unjustly damaging his reputation. 

The hasty heedlessncss of vestries and the ignorance of 
building committees are often shielded in this manner from 
righteous censure, when, at the same time, one or more of 


Digitized by Google 



WARMING AND VENTILATING. 51 

them may have been the ngeucy through which the empirical 
inventor, with his “ patent hot air furnace” or multiplicity of 
ventilating registers, has just obtained encouragement and a 
numerously signed diploma to assist him in further experi- 
ments upon the health and happiness of his fellow-creatures. 

Science seldom assists the furnace maker in his ingenious 
and complex contrivances, and the laws of nature are to him 
of little consequence, so long as he can diffuse “ the greatest 
amount of heat with the least quantity of fuel” from his huge 
atmospheric destroyer, and in return receive his pecuniary 
consideration. 

If it be really through the connivance of the architect in 
his specification, and his acceptance of a proffered bribe, that 
the furnace vender is enabled to impose upon the church his 
heating and ventilating apparatus; then the vestry or building 
committee — even though the manufacturer of furnaces come 
from among them — are still responsible to their constituents 
for their carelessness in commissioning a dishonest architect 
to undertake their works. 

It may seem unjust to confine these strictures on dishonesty 
to the sphere of my profession, but there is not here space, 
nor is it compatible with the nature of this work to say more, 
or a picture of vast incapacity, deception, dishonesty, bribing 
and bonus giving could be drawn, whose details would severely 
reflect upon too many officials, church building committees, 
builders, and others who call themselves architects, but have 
no right to the name. 

The architect’s vocation is to design, and with the aid of 
artificers to build from his design ; and no matter how many 
invectives may be launched against him, he cannot be made 


Digitized by Google 




52 INTRODUCTION. 


professionally or otherwise responsible for the manner in 
which the building he erected is warmed or ventilated when 
it is effected through machinery devised by others. 

If the building committee thiuk fit to introduce Mr. ’s 

ingenious contrivance for warming the church, and also his 
patent ventilating register, adjusted by a cord and tassel; 
they are responsible, and not the architect; they are respon- 
sible to their God for the workings of these poisonous pro- 
cesses by which so many of their confiding fellow-creatures 
are insensibly hurried into eternity. 

Men of known scientific capacity, high honor, and intel- 
&gt; lectual worth, should constitute building committees, and not 
those whose very occupations, daily transactions, and limited 
knowledge render them unfit to take upon themselves the 
erection of a house to the honor of God, or to provide for the 
trusting, refined and gentle portiou of good Christian people. 

If it be insisted, “ Such an one is our largest subscriber, 
our moneyed man and the main-stay of our enterprise ;” let 
us answer, “ Then forego your enterprise, or delay proceed- 
ings until you may be able to build without his assistance ; 
for Christ is the corner stone of the Church, and not his pre- 
tending follower, and the edifices devoted to His service 
should be founded in justice and honor and holiness.” 

If the church is to be warmed and ventilated under the 
direction of the architect, then it becomes him to reflect 
seriously upon the mode that will best accomplish the pur- 
poses of heating and airing, and being thoroughly satisfied 
that the many-voiced denunciation of the prevalent mode is 
just, let him seek substitutes contrived upon new and different 
principles. The simplest is the best; and though it is im- 
practicable to adapt the spacious and elegant fire-place of 
former times to modern purposes, we can yet keep the prin- 


Digitized by Google 




WARMING AND VENTILATING. 53 


ciple in view, and, as Franklin did, modify it to suit our more 
economical material and present requirements. 

If the principle of combining ventilation and warming in 
the same apparatus is kept in view — and there are abundant 
reasons for so doing — the hot air furnace will soon fall into 
disuse, and scientific investigation may then take another and 
wiser direction, and humanity receive its benefits. As it is, 
the hot air, rushing up from rusty, complicated twistings, that 
seem to burn up its vitality before it accomplishes its purpose, 
and the noxious gas generated to find its easy exit through 
expanded joints, must still be breathed, if shrewd, untaught 
inventors are to be encouraged, in preference to the more 
skilful and scientific. 

Pure air favors health — bad air begets disease. A volume 
of words should not be needed to prove these maxims. The 
mere mention of the modern drawing-room will be suggestive 
of sad reflections on the insalubrity of vitiated air, dry heat and 
the eifluvia of crowds ; and it should be our earnest effort to 
abate similar ills and their baleful consequences in erecting 
our structures for religious worship and edification. 

The preceding remarks are founded ppon a belief that a 
substitute can be adopted with good results ; and here an 
effort to that effect shall be made, lest the author be classed 
with those idle cavillers who are ever ready to condemn, 
but loth to devise, when a remedy is desired of them — who 
acknowledge the prevailing evil, but fear the scoffs that await 
them should they dare to oppose the rage of current opinion. 

To be brief then in the description of a substitute in which 
warmth and ventilation shall be combined. 

Fire is an agent as useful in ventilating as in warming a ! j 


Digitized by Google 




64 


INTRODUCTION. 


i 






given space. We feel the warmth of the fire ; and the 
atmosphere that comes in contact with it is burned up. The 
vacuum produced by the combustion of oxygen is readily 
supplied by an influx of fresh air, and thus by the rush of air 
the impurities and bodily exhalations are continually and in- 
sensibly expelled. Carbonic acid gas, which is exhaled from 
the lungs, is heavier than the atmosphere, and can only be 
expelled from below, by means of registers placed in the 
floor and so arranged as not to be exposed to heavy currents 
of air. 

The coal then — or wood where it may be preferred — must 
be brought up from the cellar and placed in receptacles, 
“rough hew them how we will,” that will further these ends. 

Grates built in the wall are not economical, though they 
subserve one of our two desiderata — that of carrying off the 
impurities of the air we breathe. Stoves are economical, and 
diffuse a greater amount of heat than any other heating appa- 
ratus — which would fulfil our second purpose ; but they injure 
the atmosphere and do not expose a sufficient surface of fire 
to the air to effect the requisite degree of ventilation. 

Combining, then, the two principles — either one being 
partly good in itself, and both together being perfect — we 
have the sheet iron “Franklin,” introducing the grate, set in 
fire brick, and adapted in size, design, number and ornament, 
to the church in which it is intended to be used, and we place 
it near to the wall, with the sheet iron pipe connecting hori- 
zontally with the smoke flue, or further removed, with an in- 
creased length of pipe, which is the most economical position. 
Care should be taken to include in the design a copper vessel 
of some kind, made to contain water, that by means of its 
evaporation the atmosphere that is robbed of its moisture in 
coming in contact with the heated metal, may be replenished. 


Digitized by Google 



CANONS OF GOTHIC COMPOSITION. 55 


Having provided the requisite warmth, and carried off the 
impurities of the atmosphere, the supply of fresh air is now 
to be considered. The patent registers usually placed near 
to the ceiling, allowed an egress to the rarified or lighter air, 
which is good air , and robbed us of the warmth that otherwise 
might be enjoyed and which is so expensive a commodity in 
winter. These registers must be taken down and placed a 
sufficient distance above the ground to avoid its gaseous ex- 
halations, and in such positions in the wall, opposite to the 
fire-places, as may be most convenient. Their construction 
in the wall must be so modified as to connect indirectly with 
the outer atmosphere through a flue, so as to avoid percep- 
tible draughts of air. In this way a sufficient supply of fresh 
air will be introduced, both summer and winter, without re- 
sorting to the homely expedient of “ luffer boarding clear- 
story windows"* or disfiguring or annulling the uses of other 
portions of the church. 

For warm weather, two or three small luffer-boarded win- 
dows, placed opposite one another, will answer all the purpose 
of carrying off' the rarified air near to the roof ; but, in cold 
weather, they must be closed. Where the roof is not open 
to the rafters, windows made in the same manner, and inserted 
in the gables, will tend to produce a current, and carry off 
the heated air between the timbers of the roof. 

Canons of @otl)ic Composition. 

The following rules are esteemed by Mr. Paley among the 
principal canons of ancient and modern Gothic composition. 
They deserve a more distinguished place than the conclusion 

° The New York EecleslologUt, Vol. II. No. II. p. 53. 


Digitized by Google 




Il 

! 5fl INTRODUCTION. 


of a chapter. Still, as they are fair deductions from its prin- 
ciples, they may constitute its fit sequel; and, on account of 
their great importance, it is trusted that they will be the last 
to be forgotten by the reader. They are arranged in juxta- 
position that they may the more easily be compared. 


THE ANCIENT PRINCIPLE WERE: 

1. To make uniformity of design 
entirely subservient and secondary 
to utility. For instance, never to 
insert a useless window or an un- 
necessary buttress in one place sole- 
ly to fill up or relieve a blank spaoe, 
or because it occurs in another cor- 
responding place: but to pile to- 
gether, to insert, to add, with any 
degree of fearless irregularity what- 
ever. Ignorance of this leading prin- 
ciple has been the cause of half the 
failures in modern designs. 

2. To use deeoratiou only as a 
means of relieving necessary con- 
structive features ; and never to add 
any detail adventitiously, for its own 
sake, solely for effect and irrespect- 

I ivcly of position, meaning and pro- 
priety. Thus, to make a blank win- 
dow or doorway, to set up an un- 
meaning niche without a statue in it, 
to erect sham gables, block off but- 
tresses midway, because the lower 
part is not seen (!) as at the Pitt 
Press, Cambridge, or insert canopies 
with nothing for them to receive, are 
examples of false principles. Almost 
all architects of the last generation 
committed these errors. They saw 
niches and turrets, and odd-looking 
excrescences in old churches, without 
ever knowing what they once con- 
tained, or why they were erected. 


THE MODERN PRINCIPLES ARE: 

1. To make buildings uniform by 
equal and similar wings, correspond- 
ing doorways, windows of the same 
size and kind, level and regular ele- 
vations, not broken up into parts 
of greater or less prominence and 
height. 

Every Gothic new building in 
Cambridge exhibits these faults, 
which are the certain result of the 
same hand composing in two contra- 
dictory styles. Classic and Gothic. 

2. To add unnecessary and un- 
meaning ornament in conspicuous 
positions to attract the eye and pro- 
duce a showy appearance, leaving 
the less exposed parts bare and na- 
ked in the contrast. 


Digitized by Google 





CANONS OF GOTHIC COMPOSITION. 57 


Hence we mav deduce two further 
rules : first, to make construction 
and propriety of composition the pri- 
mary, decoration the secondary ob- 
ject, and not to decorate at all until 
a substantial and durable fabric shall 
have been fully provided for ; sec- 
ondly, to regard reality and truth- 
fulness before mere show, and to 
conceal nothing from a fancied im- 
propriety of appearance. 

3. To attend exclusively to utility 
and to let effect take care of itself. 
Thus if there is any reason for part 
of a window to be encroached upon, 
as at Hauton, Notts, or one pinnacle 
to be larger than another, as in the 
tower at Grantham, or one angle of 
a tower to be propped with a larger 
buttress, as at Homingsea, near Cam- 
bridge, or an arch to be contracted 
or widened to any extent, — to obey 
the demand fearlessly and without 
hesitation. Modern men often adopt 
the most awkward expedients to 
avoid what is really a great beauty 
instead of a blemish. 

4. To create ideal extent by mul- 
tiplicity of parts, by distribution of 
thrusts, division vertically and hori- 
zontally by buttresses and string- 
courses, repetition of features and 
compartments of continuous vaults 
and roofs ; and ideal height by nar- 
rowness combined with length, which 
are the conditions of the most effi- 
cient perspective. 

5. To attain infinite variety, both 
of details and arrangement, even to 
the extravagant indulgence of ca- 
price by combining, adapting, and 
diversifying given elements , as mold- 


3. To place effect before utility, 
as by building an inconvenient or 
unnecessary feature because it is sup- 
posed to look well. Hence we have 
doors which afford no entrance, tur- 
rets with no available interior, and 
chimneys which do not emit smoke. 


4. To erect buildings whose pri- 
mary idea is that of a large unbroken 
area, without columns and arches, 
with wide roofs and without dis- 
tinct component parts. Such i eere the 
great majority of the modern church- 
es, which often had neither buttress, 
nor string-course, nor arch in the 
whole design ; in short nothing Go- 
thic about them except the minor 
details. 

5. To use usque ad nauseam a 
few hackneyed Gothic details, copied 
from celebrated churches or cathe- 
drals, or borrowed from books; and 
to apply these without sufficient re- 


8 


Digitized by Google 




58 INTRODUCTION. 


ings, arches, shafts, panelings, tra- 
cery, etc. 

6. To make extreme simplicity 
and extreme richness of workman- 
ship compatible with the same true 
principles, by always regarding the 
latter as merely the luxury of art , 
and the legitimate scope for ingenu- 
ity, expenditure and gradual execu- 
tion. 

7. To regulate the exterior plan 
solely by the internal requirements. 


8. To aim at apparent lightness, 
combined with actual strength ; and 
at the same time to satisfy the eye 
by giving the idea of security from 
each part having its own peculiar 
support. 


gard to difference in the kind* and 
character of buildings. 

6. To sacrifice solidity and strength 
to unnecessary and adventitious or- 
nament, and to impoverish the fab- 
ric to obtain the greatest possible 
amount of conspicuous but needless 
decoration. 


7. To arrange exterior elevations 
without regard to the nature of the 
interior, or to force the latter to suit 
the former ; as to give the outward 
appearance of nave and aisles where 
there are no columns or arches in- 
side ; of three gabled roofs where 
there is but one flat ceiling within ; 
of pinnacles or gable-crosses which 
are but chimneys. 

Hence the custom of building 
mask » either to hide necessary parts 
which do exist, or to give the idea 
of those which do not. 

8. To be satisfied with actual weak- 
ness without even apparent lightness, 
as by the use of plastered timber to 
imitate stone, and by the omission of 
essential constructive details, such as 
shafts, moldings, and the visible re- 
sistance of lateral thrusts. 


Digitized by Google 



Nomenclature. 


'* Order \s Heaven's first law ; and this confcst, 

Some are, and must be, greater than the rest." 

HE vexed controversy on the nomenclature 
and the classification of the several styles of 
English medieval architecture seems now 
somewhat to have subsided. The archaeolo- 
gist has apparently exhausted his vocabulary 
of terms in applying them to designate the different styles ; 
and the student, for whom these classifications were benevo- 
lently prepared that he might more directly and easily arrive 
at a true understanding of Gothic architecture, is almost as 
much perplexed in endeavoring to find the least abstruse 
authority among so many guides, as to determine the merits 
of the various systems of nomenclature proposed. 

With those of Rickman, Bloxam, Milner, Dallaway, Paley 
and the English Ecclesiological Society and divers others be- 
fore him, verily the task of selection seems hopeless ; and the 
study of most of them would involve him in confusion, and 
leave him hardly more edified than one living before these 
productions saw the light, in that lethargy of the art which 
our authors have striven to dispel, and that chaos of archi- 
tecture which they aimed to organize into science. 

That they have simplified the study of Gothic architecture, 
it is presumed will not be generally conceded. Though their 



Digitized by Google 


60 nomenclature: 


productions teem with theories, inventions, and hallucinations 
of fancy, as might be expected from such versatile talents 
and prolific imaginations, engaged upon a subject invested 
with such high importance and such deep interest to all 
estates of men in the land; yet the end has not much varied 
from the beginning, and the theory of one writer is made to 
answer that of another, metamorphosed as it may be, by 
multiplying the number of styles, by the device of need- 
less distinctions, by changes of names, and by a wordy 
rhetoric. 

These remarks on the nomenclature of the art are intro- 
duced because I owe to the reader a reason for adopting the 
names of the Early English for the First period of English 
Gothic architecture, the Decorated English for the Second 
period, and the Perpendicular English for the Third period. 

It is the nomenclature first proposed by the late Thomas 
Rickman, F. S. A., in his “Attempt to Discriminate the Styles 
of Architecture in England.” And “ the character of this 
! extraordinary man, whose genius first reduced this chaos into 
order, was not calculated to diminish the violence of his op- 
ponents.” Hence sprang into print and publicity the vague 
ideas and inappropriate phraseology of those academic plagi- 
arists who delight to find additional occupation in a novelty 
of the day, whose prolific pens hasten to reproduce the ideas 
of original inventors, and who have done little better than 
substitute names with additional divisions of styles, and to 
expand this admirable author’s descriptions of his own classi- 
fied divisions. 

The use of Mr. Rickman’s terms and chronology has now 
become general and well understood. The exactness ■ dis- 


Digitized by Google 




NOMENCLATURE. 61 


played in his discriminations of the styles, the precise date 
assigned to each — allowing always for a transition from one 
style to the other — the few terms used and their appropriate- 
ness to the subject, render his work an easy basis of study, 
rather to be emulated than perverted by the professors of 
architecture. 

There may be a more beautiful terminology ; but his sys- 
tem has now been so long in use that a mere change of 
names, while we retain his original, chronological order, 
is truly useless, and tends by its vagueness to mystify the 
minds of many with regard to that which was before so lucid 
and precise. 

This feeling seems to have been predominant with Mr. Boid, 
in his “History of all the Principal Styles of Architecture, 
when adopting First, Second, and Third, in order to avoid as 
much as possible the use of technical language in a popular 
work.” 

Mr. Boid’s classification, says the English Archaeological 
Journal, from which I borrow the following terse remarks, 
was “ perhaps more sensible than the general abuse of Rick- 
man’s technical terms with which every one has been wearied 
of late. But this judicious avoiding of technical language is 
widely different from the plan proposed by the [English] 
Ecclesiologist in 1846, of adopting, * First, Middle, and Third 
Pointed,’ as a new technical language, and doing away with 
the name of ‘ Gothic’ altogether, as inappropriate, overlooking 
the fact that this name is applied, in the same manner as we 
apply it, in every language in Europe." 


“ It is easy to show that the objections to this proposed 
new nomenclature are at least as great as any that apply to 



Digitized by Google 




62 NOMENCLATURE. 


Rickman’s terms. In the first place, the transition from Nor- 
man, or what Mr. Bloxam calls the ‘ Semi-Norman Style,’ is 
unquestionably the 'First Pointed Style.’ It is not a Gothic 
Style, but it is Pointed. Secondly, to describe a church as 
having ‘ First Pointed round-headed doorways,’ and * Middle 
Pointed square-headed windows,’ is more absurd than any 
thing in Rickman. Yet such examples do occur, and that not 
by ones or twos, but by tens and hundreds. In some dis- 
tricts, almost every church will be found with either Early 
English round-headed doorways, and sometimes pier-arches 
also, or with Decorated square-headed windows. In other 
words, it was a very common practice in the thirteenth cen- 
tury to use round arches with all the details of pure Gothic 
work, and in the fourteenth century it was still more common 
to use square-headed windows, often with very beautiful 
moldings and details, and tracery. 

“ Thirdly : It would be very possible to build a thoroughly 
good Gothic church, taken entirely from fine ancient exam- 
ples, without a single pointed arch throughout. This is fatal 
to the scheme ; it proves that the pointed arch is not an 
essential feature but an accident of that style, which by the 
common consent of all Europe is called Gothic, and whatever 
the origin of the name may have been, any attempt to change 
it is now too late. Another serious objection to the proposed 
‘ new' nomenclature’ is its vagueness and want of precision, 
no one can say where the first style begins or ends.” 

The preceding extract has been made, not solely for the 
purpose of confirming the ideas advanced of what is correct, 
easy of practice and eminently useful, but also that there may 
be greater force and meaning given to the objections that are 
urged against the adoption of the proposed nomenclature of 


Digitized by Google 



NOMENCLATURE. 63 

the English Ecclesiological Society, which has been promul- 
gated here to a certain extent by a kindred society,* perhaps 
with more praiseworthy zeal, than sensible propriety. 

The study of architecture is but in its infancy among us, 
and its greatest encouragement and most effectual progress 
are to be achieved by the professors of the art who elucidate 
its first principles clearly and truthfully. For this reason 
Rickman’s discrimination of the styles, which was the first 
ever placed before the English people, still remains in the 
ascendant and bids fair to maintain its position. 

° The New York Ecclesiological Society. 


Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 


Design i. 


tfurlii (linjlisb. 



(6rouni» "|Jlan. 


Digitized by Google 






4 


Digitized by Google 1 



"W r s t &lt;£lf»atii&gt;n. 


Digitized by Google 


I 




Digitized by Google| 


DESlUlj . i-UTr. IV 



Digitized by Google 


uutlt &lt;£lr nation . 


Digitized by Google 



DESIGN I 


(£nrli\ (liiiijlisf). 



Digitized by Google 




1 



Digitized by Google 


DESIGH I. 


&lt;i : irr l ij tf n g li sb . 


PLATE VT 



Digitized by Google 


Digitized by Google 


Digitized by Google 


ifarhj (fhiglisl). 



Digitized by Google 


^9 rre prrtit»tf ^ if w . 

jftom il]p iroutli &lt;$asf 


I 



the classification 
that I have adopted, that of the 
late Thomas Rickman, this is the 
second period of English archi- 
tecture, and the first of the point- 
ed or Gothic styles. It prevailed 
' • in all its magnificence and without 
debasement about one hundred and 
eighteen years, succeeding the Norman 
style towards the latter part of the 
twelfth century, or commencing in the reign 
of King Richard I., and continuing to the 
early part of the fourteenth century, when it 
gradually merged into the next or Decorated 
style. 

The reign of Richard L, be- 
ginning in the year one thou- 
sand one hundred and eighty- 
nine, was the principal period of the transition from the Nor- 
man to the Early English style. 


I 



EARLY ENGLISH STYLE. 67 


moldings sometimes conforming to it — and doable arched when 
the opening of the arch will admit of the center shaft dividing ! 
the door in two, with a quatrefoil or other ornament in the 
tympanum. 

There are but few doorways of the last-named style in 
small churches — it is mostly confined to cathedrals and other 
large buildings. 

The several varieties of the pointed arch are in promiscuous 
use in the doorway, though the drop arch is the most common, 
and, when the jambs are deeply recessed and the arch mold- 
ings numerous, the outer arch has the appearance almost of a 
semi-circle ; the round arch, with Early English shafts and 
moldings, is occasionally met with, and also the square-headed 
trefoil ; the latter is confined to priests’ doors, doors to turrets 
and passages. 

The shafts are small and delicate, placed in rectangular 
recesses, almost always detached, and they were wrought out 
of Purbeck marble or other fine material, different from that 
of the rest of the doorway ; the capitals are generally enriched 
with bold and well-relieved foliage, but as often consist of 
plain deeply undercut moldings ; the base of the shaft is 
various, and there is one generally used that has a most 
striking resemblance to the Attic base, with its rounds and 
hollows, the latter deeply undercut. 

The arch moldings are cut in rectangular planes, and when 
they are numerous, all of the characteristic moldings of this 
style will be found among them. 

Although there are good examples of doorways without 
any ornament, yet there is a general enrichment of the hollows 


Digitized by Google 




68 ANALYSIS OF THE 


of the arch moldings and the jamb between the shafts with 
the tooth ornament, leaves and other peculiar decorations. 

The drip-stone is seldom omitted, and its terminations are 
either decorated with heads and clumps of characteristic 
foliage, or arc returned horizontally; the latter form is most 
usual and often continued around buttresses and other pro- 
jections. 

The doors are seldom paneled or traceried ; their relief 
consists in the ornamented hinge and appended iron scroll 
work, sometimes on the inside as well as the outside. 

The hinge, in some instances, is merely a plain iron strap, 
with heavy projecting nail heads, and, in others, the scroll 
work added to the hinge, covers the door in great variety j 
and beauty of design.. 

It was during the Early English period that the art of j 
working in iron reached its highest medieval perfection. 

I 

ItJinii OUJS. 

In describing the peculiarities of this style it might be said 
that the lancet-shaped window was a conspicuous feature. It 
is observable in large buildings, but the remark does not 
strictly apply to parish churches, in which other forms pre- 
dominate. 

The lowness of the walls in Early English churches did not 
encourage the adoption of the long, narrow, lancet-headed 
windows ; those in general use are of greater width in pro- 
portion to their height than what is usually called the lancet, 
and it is very remarkable that they increase in width to a 
certain extent as the height is diminished. 

The equilateral arch, requiring a wall of less altitude, and 


Digitized by Google 



EARLY ENGLISH STYLE. 69 ! 

/ 

affording a wider opening, was necessary in the construction 
of windows that were limited in height, and it favored the 
early inode of building, as may be naturally concluded, since 
the equilateral-headed window is the most common. That as 
much height as possible might be gained inside, the arch of 
the interior was seldom made concentric with that of the 
exterior, but either of a drop or segmental form, with a soffit 
quite or nearly horizontal. 

The exterior angles of the jambs are but slightly chamfered, 
thereby allowing great depth of splay in the interior, which 
necessarily increases the width of the opening in the plane of 
the wall within to several times the width of the glazed aper- 
ture. The arris of the interior angles thus formed was relieved 
by a simple bowtel or a series of moldings that were seldom 
omitted ; the chamfered arch at the head, with or without 
corbels, is peculiar to the windows of this style, and is gener- 
ally found with the segmental and drop arch. 

The single-light, equilateral arched window — its greatest 
beauty consisting in its simplicity — was in general use during 
the prevalence of this style. In its gradations to the window 
of the next period, the rude trefoil arch was not unfrequent, 
and from it arose the primitive cusp, formed independently 
of the outer splay and attached to the soffit of the arch. 

The triplet window, the most remarkable combination and 
peculiarity of this style, is chiefly confined to the east end of 
the chancel, and it is in this position that its symbolism is 
most suitable. 

Two windows long and narrow, and placed side by side, 
are not unusual in the same situation ; neither the triplet nor 


Digitized by Google 




70 ANALYSIS OF THE 


doublet window is however confined to the east or chancel end, 
as there are many examples of each in various other positions. 

Windows in combination of three, five, and seven — the 
central one being the greatest in width and height, with the 
others decreasing in these respects as they are placed out- 
ward — were ordinarily included under one drip-stone, with 
their divisions so small that they seem more like lights of one 
window, than really separate and distinct openings ; their 
individuality is in some examples preserved to a greater ex- 
tent by forming the drip-stone from the same centers as those 
of the arch of the window. 

From these combinations of narrow windows and their per- 
forations and their soffit cusps arose the single, traceried win- 
dow of the next style. 

Unlike the preceding style, the ornamental shafts of the 
windows are mostly confined to the interior, and on account 
of their diminutive diameter and great length, they required 
additional strength in the central band ; their base partakes 
of the Attic peculiarities, and the capital, though often devoid 
of ornament, is as often characteristically enriched. 

The arch molding:* receive their greatest beauty from the 
boldness with which they are undercut; the tooth and other 
ornaments are common to the hollows of these moldings. 

The shafts of the piers and jambs vary in number, are iso- 
lated and, like those of the doors, were cut out of marble or 
fine stone, different from the other work, and polished. 

Such ornamentation of the interior of the windows is pe- 
culiar to this style ; the depth of jamb, and its deep shadow, 
and the effective grouping of all its appendages, were entirely 
forgotten in the interior of windows of the succeeding styles. 


Digitized by Google 




EARLY ENGLISH STYLE. 71 


Clear-stories are very rare in Early English churches and 
consequently there are but few examples of clear-story win- 
dows; these are the circular and spherical triangular, trcfoiled j 
or quatrefoiled, and the two light windows, differing but little i 
from those of the aisles. 

Piers. 

The plan of the Early English pier varies from great sim- 
plicity to complexity of arrangement ; the oldest are octan- 
gular and circular, placed in some churches alternately. 

Following so closely the Norman style, when piers were 
massive and ill proportioned, they retained at first somewhat 
of the Norman character — the pier being generally the last 
member to be affected by the introduction of any new style ; 
but as architects became better skilled, they were satisfied 
with piers, always of sufficient stability, yet smaller and with 
more delicate outline. 

This led to greater boldness and consequent improve- 
ment ; and the use of a central pier, around which clustered 
delicate, detached shafts, varying in number — of some finer 
material than the main pier, generally of Purbeck marble 
highly polished — predominated over all others. At length 
the slenderness of the shaft and its increased length demanded 
the band or annulet as additional security ; this was placed 
midway on the shaft, and fastened to the maiu pier : in large 
buildings, the number of the bands is variously increased. 

The capitals of the piers are numerous in design and for 
the most part plain ; the upper members heavy, in bold relief 
and bell-like shape, and, where there are shafts, these mem- 
bers often continuing around the centre pier : where the shaft 


Digitized by Google 




72 ANALYSIS OF THE 


of the pier is multangular or circular, the moldings conform 
to its plan. 

When the capitals are ornamented, the foliage approximates 
to nature, flowing and well relieved ; it is on the capitals of 
the pier shafts that the most elegant sculpture is seen. 

The bases, like those of the window shafts, bear a strong 1 
resemblance to the Attic base ; the designs of the bases are 
not so numerous as in the other styles: the reversed ogee is 
not uncommon. 

When the plinths are rectangular, as they are generally in 
circular and octangular piers, the triangular spaces below the 
torus, on the plinth top, are relieved by a leaf springing out 
of the torus or lower member of the base, and gracefully fall- 
ing on these triangular spaces. 

2lrcl)C9. 

No peculiar form of arch is, without exceptions, a distin- 
guishing feature of any one.of the Gothic styles separately, as 
some have supposed ; and I will therefore extend this descrip- 
tion to arches iu general, as used in this and both of the fol- 
lowing styles. 

The. drop and the equilateral arch were employed in all of 
the Gothic styles. Towards the latter part of the Perpendic- 
ular period, they gave way to the introduction of the four- 
centered arch, which is to a degree a peculiarity of the style, 
although an invention of an earlier period. 

The lancet arch is, though not invariably, characteristic of 
the Early English style : it is sometimes employed in the 
Decorated, but very rarely in the Perpendicular. 


Digitized by Google 




EARLY ENGLISH STYLE. 73 


The ogee or contrasted arch is an invention of the Decorated 
period, and was continued in use through the Perpendicular 
style, yet with less frequency than in the Decorated. 

The pointed-segmental, the round , the trej oiled and the cinque- 
foiled arches arc also common to the Early English style ; the 
latter are most usually found in panels, arcades, niches and 
doors of small proportions. 

It is not uncommon in Perpendicular work, particularly in 
screens, tabernacle work and paneling, to find all the arches 
which are used in the three different styles, blended together 
in one design ; this mixture denotes late or debased work, as 
does also the flattening of the four-centered arch. 

Buttresses. 

In the Norman style, in which the walls were very thick, 
the buttresses were merely flat projections, apparently built 
out of the wall, more for the purpose of relief, than as a dis- 
tinct erection necessary for support or resistance. A con- 
tinued reduction of the thickness of the wall, and an increased 
projection consequently given to the flat buttress, eventually 
made it a distinguishing feature in the future styles. 

Early English walls are not so thick as those of the Norman 
works, and the omission of the tie beams in the construction 
of their roofs, rendered it necessary that greater resistance 
should be given by the walls to the pressure from the roof. 
It was effected by the buttress. At first this buttress was but 
a slight improvement on that of the Norman, but it gradually 
received greater projection, with a reduced width ; the incli- 


10 


Digitized by Google 




74 ANALYSIS OF THE 


nation of the set-offs is very acute, the lowest member some- 
J times continued laterally around the buttress, when allowed 
by the reduction of the upper stage ; the stages are few, most i 
frequently two in number, with the angles of the buttress 
sometimes chamfered, plain sloped, or ornamented at their 
terminations. 

The pinnacled, gabled and arch-buttress were not in gen- 
eral use in this style, and were mostly confined to large 
buildings. 

The gablet, which evidently suggested the gubled buttress, 
was commonly placed on the sloping weathering of a buttress, 
coping to gables, efc cetera. 

One particular worthy of notice is that the walls of a ma- 
jority of the Early English churches, and their buttresses, are 
devoid of all base moldings, or any approximation to a base. 

illolbtngs. 

The moldings of this style are not very numerous ; they 
are principally marked by their constantly recurring deep 
undercuts and bold, intervening members. 

The bowtel, and rounds and hollows predominate, with 
various modifications; the bowtel is varied with the addition 
of one, two or three fillets ; there is also the bowtel of one 
fillet almost reduced to an arris, and the rounds deeply under- 
cut, leaf-like, on one side ; splays are sometimes used; rounds 
and hollows join without separating fillets, and two or more 
smaller members are placed between latger ones. 

There was less geometrical precision used in the drawing 


Digitized by Google 


EARLY ENGLISH STYLE. 75 


of the Early English moldings than in any of the subsequent' 
styles ; but in their positions, as in the arches of doors and 
windows, and in nave arches, the moldings, often being drawn 
with easy and graceful curves, were made so to conform, that 
the contour of the most conspicuous members, would touch an 
imaginary line drawn in a series of rectangular planes. 

The enrichments of the moldings are not numerous, though 
rendered very effective through the bold and easy manner in 
which they are relieved in the hollows. 

The dog-tooth ornament, in general closely repeated, is the 
most prevalent; leaves and flowers, singly or in running pat- 
terns, were also used. 


Hoofs. 

At one time but little importance was attached to the sup- 
posed Early English timber roof, on account of the simple and 
rude manner of its construction ; in fact almost any rudely 
constructed roof, though properly belonging to the Norman 
period, was considered peculiar to the Early English style, 
and so it was difficult to cite any examples possessing arehi- 
1 tectural merit. 

The primitive character of the framing work, and the pres- 
ence of the rude nail-head carved upon the tie-beam — which 
was supposed to be the tooth-ornament in its incipient state — 
tended greatly to promote the error that the Norman roof 
| originated in a later period. 

Faithful archieological research has discovered for the Early 
English style its own peculiar roof, and assigned the rude tie 
beam roof to a much earlier period. 


Digitized by Google 




76 ANALYSIS OF THE 


The Early English roof is distinguished by the truss-like 
arrangement of its timbers ; the rafters being placed one foot 
six inches or two feet apart, and each pair of rafters secured 
together by diagonal or cross braces, and sometimes with the 
addition of one or more collar beams, placed above or hori- 
zontally intersecting these cross braces. The timbers at their 
intersections were either tenoned or halved and secured with 
wooden pins ; the average of the scantling was four by five 
inches. 

In some early examples, a rude tie beam, placed at remote 
intervals, was retained with this arrangement of the rafters; 
but without tie beams, this roof is designated as the “trussed- 
rafter-roof it was without ridge pieces or purlins ; the 
plate was placed on the center of the wall ; on it were halved 
pieces resting horizontally and at right angles, to each of 
which was secured the foot of a rafter ; the inner end of each 
piece was retained in its proper position by a vertical piece 
framed into it and the rafter, which gave additional security 
to the whole framing. Two plates were sometimes used, 
when the inner one was slightly projected and molded as a 
cornice. 

The aisle roof, in the early period of this style, was formed 
by continuing the rafters of the nave roof over the aisle. 
When the clear-story was used, a separation of the nave and 
aisle roofs became necessary. 

The disconnection of the two roofs made but a slight differ- 
ence in their framing. The principal timbers of the aisle roof 
were yet made to correspond with those of the nave. A simi- 
larity is also to be observed in other parts of the roofa 

When the width of the aisle would not admit of the use of 


Digitized by Google 



EARLY ENGLISH STYLE. 


the lean-to roof, the gable roof was substituted, and made of 
low pitch that it might not obstruct the light of the clear- 
story windows. 

These, and the following remarks on the aisle roofs of this 
period will apply as well to those of the succeeding styles. 

Gable roofs, although frequently of great elevation, are sel- 
dom found of an equilateral pitch or an angle of sixty degrees. 

\ 

Aisle roofs were generally of a low pitch. The rise from 
the exterior or aisle wall to the nave wall was not more than * 
sufficient to place the wall plate a few inches above the apex 
of the nave arches. In this manner was avoided unnecessary 
walling over the nave piers and arches. 

The inclination of a roof is not a distinguishing feature of 
either of the Gothic styles, but varies in each from the acutely 
pointed to the most obtuse angle. 



Sedili* &gt;n Chancel, Denford, Northamptonahtr* • 


• Hickman 


Digitized by Google 


JDcscrtption of % |3latcs. 


DESIGN I. 


n. ft 

Chancel, IS by 25 

Nave, 15 by 45 

Sacristy, 13 by 8 


ft Id. ft 

North Aisle, &gt; ?0 . 

South Aisle, ) 

Organ Chapel, . 10 by 15 


45 


South Porch, B by 7. 

Plate I. 

Perspective View taken from the South West. 

Plate II. 

Horizontal Section or Ground Plan. 


A. Chancel. 

B. Nave. 

C. North Aisle. 


I). South Aisle. 

E. Sacristy. 

F. Organ Chapel. 


G. South Poroh. 

Plate III. 

Geometrical View of the West Facade. 

Plate IV. 

Geometrical View of the South Fa9ade. 


Plate V. 

Geometrical View of a Vertical Section of the Design, taken from North 
to South, looking East. 


Plate VI. 

Analysis of tub Design. 

Fig. 1 . Geometrical Drawing of East Triplet Window. 
“ 2. Horizontal Section of the same. 


BCAJJ 

| 4 ft. = 


Inch. 


Digitized by Google 


THE EARLY ENGLISH STYLE. 


79 


J- 2 ft. = Inch. 


Fig. 3. Geometrical Drawing of one of the Nave Piers, 'J 
with Vertical Sections of Capital and Base 
Moldings. 

M 4. Horizontal Section of Nave Arch at the Capital of ] 
the Pier. 

“ 5. Horizontal Section of one of the Nave Piers, show- 
ing the Base. 

w 6. Geometrical Drawing of part of the Chancel Arch. 

M 7. Horizontal Section of the same at the Spring of &gt; 2 ft. = Inch, 
the Arch. J 

“ 8. Geometrical Drawing of tlie Set-offs to Buttresses. 4 ft. = Inch. 

The Sittings are about 200 in number. 


DESIGN EL 


ft. In. ft. In. ft. In. ft 

Chancel, .... 23 by 30 North Aisle, . , 11.8 by 49 

Nave, 23 by 82 Soath Aisle, . . 11.6 by 62 

Sacristy,. . . . 11.6 by 11.6 Tower, 12 by 12 

South Porch, 8 by 10. 


{Hate I. 

Perspective View taken from tho South East. 


Plate II. 

Horizontal Section or Ground Plan. 


A. Chancel. 

B. Nave. 

C. North Aisle. 

D. South Aisle. 


E. Sacristy. 

F. Organ Chapel. 

G. Tower. 

H. South Porch. 


Plate III. 

Geometrical View of the East Fajade, showing tho Tower to the North 
West. 


Plate IV. 

Geometrical View of the South Fajade, with the Spire of the Tower 
omitted. 


Digitized by Google 




80 


DESCRIPTION OF PLATES. 


Geometrical View of a V 
to South, looking East 


Geometrical View of a V 
West, looking North. 



Plait V. 

Section of the Dcsim, taken from North 





Plate VI. ' 

ill Section of the Desii 


taken from East to 





Plait VII. 

S A.I.YSIS OF TUK DESIGN. 

Fio. 1. Geometrical Drawing of the East Triplet Wiili&amp;w, a 
showing half of the interior and half of the ex- I 
terior. ' ti ~ | 

“ 2. Horizontal Section of the same. . J 

“ 3. Geometrical Drawing of Setoffs to Principal But- - 
tresses. 

“ 4. Geometrical Drawing of String Course continued 
around the Building. 

“ 5. Geometrical Drawing of Set-off to the Second t 
Section of the Tower. I 

“ 6. Geometrical Drawing of Set-off to the First Seo- f 
tion of the Tower. J 


4 it. = Inch. 

t.. . 

2 ft. = Inch. 
1 ft. = Inch. 

4 ft. = Inch. 


Plate VIII. 

Analysis of the Design (continued). 

Fig. 1 . Geometrical View of the West Door in the Tower. 
u 2. Horizontal Section of Jamb ami Arcliivolt Mold- 
ings to the same. 

l*of the Moldings of the Chancel Arch at its 

"Hi 

4. Vertic® Section of the Capitals to the 
“ 5. Verticiu Section of the Base to the same 
“ 6. Geomirical View of the Ends of Two Pews. 

“ 7. V crt^dfli'j^giog uf^jm gapping to the End* 

“ 8. Geometrical Drawing of the Drip Stone 
tion to the East Triplet Window. 

The Sittings are about 400 in number. 



nch. 



3igiitee^^GoogIe 



CO rail nil "plan. 


Digitized by Google 





Digitized by Google 


. r. ic-M n 


&lt;£nrlri (fc’nglisb. 


PLAiil ill. 





&lt;fc'a$t tflniation 


Digitized by Google 


Digitized by Google 


LKS10N_[i PLATE IV 




Digitized by Google 



iTrnnsw rrsr jS'rrtioit. 


Digitized by Google 


Digitized by Google 



n ;(• ; -3d 



£ 



Digitized by Google 



Analysis. 


id by Google 




Digitized by Google 


DESIGN t! 


(£ it rln English 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 


ny.sh.\ Tit 


B ecorntcb 


PLATL I 


I 



^frspfftitif flirut 

.from fii? IBcat 


Digitized by Google 





Stye 

Decorated (EtiglisI) 0t«lc. 


" But thou, of temples old or altars new, 

Standcst alone — with nothing like to thee — 
Worthiest of God, the holy and the true.” 

’ N English architecture the Dec- 
orated style is the third, and in 
Gothic it is the second. It ex- 
tended over a period of time 
not much more than half that 
of the Early English, or about 
seventy years, commencing in 
''the reign of Edward II., or the early part 
of the fourteenth century, and continuing 
through the greater part of the reign of 
Edward III. 

The Early English style boasts of its great 
number of ecclesiastical edifices of simple and 
unostentatious grandeur. The Decorated, 
though greatly inferior to its predecessor in 
the number of its edifices, 
has no equal in magnifi- 
cent erections or gorgeous 
display. 


11 


Digitized by Google 


DECORATED ENGLISH STYLE. 83 


and on monuments, and painting, employed in staining figures 
upon the window glass, were added, as handmaid arts minis- 
tering to architecture, distinguished by the same signs of pro- 
gress towards excellence. And to the sympathetic workings 
of these arts during this age, must be attributed the magnifi- 
cent effect of the flowing window tracery, resplendent with 
the richest colors, and the great beauty of monumental erec- 
tions, incomplete without their sculptured effigies ; and both, 
blending harmoniously with the sublime architecture of the 
Gothic interiors and exteriors, produced in a church a superb 
combination, a worthy symbol of its holy purposes, and a rich 
oblation to the glory and honor of God. 

Doormans. 

The double doorway had been but sparingly used in the 
churches of the last style. It possesses such exquisite features 
that, in the rapid progress of architecture at this period, one 
would suppose it should have been better appreciated and 
oftener employed in the Decorated style than it was. How- 
ever, it was not altogether abandoned, but as in the former 
style, seldom used except in large buildings. 

Decorated doorways were greatly increased in size when 
compared with the single ones of the Early English style, and 
though without the centre shaft, are nearly as large as the 
double doorway heretofore described. 

Their marked characteristics are the ogee drip-stone, inde- 
pendent of the arch below, either crocheted or terminated 
with a finial or plain, and the angular arrangement of the drip- 
stone over the doorways ;* and with the intermediate spaces 
in both examples relieved in various ways. 

° The modern nomenclature of this arrangement is “Gabled Doorway.” It is one 
of the misnomers so common in architecture, and in this instance seems particularly 


Digitized by Google 




84 ANALYSIS OF THE 


Another feature is, that the shafts are not detached and cut 
separately, as in the last style, but worked in with the mold- 
ings and cut upon the jamb stones, having much the same 

appearance of lightness, but with the addition of greater 

. 

security. 

The arch moldings are more numerous than those of the 
Early English doorways. The moldings of the arch falling 
on the shafts are cut on the rectangular planes, and those that 
are continuous are cut on the chamfer plane. In some small 
doorways the moldings are continuous, either carried down 
to the ground, or cut by splays, or intercepted by base mold- 
. ings. In some examples the arch moldings have feathered 
tracery, hanging quite free from the inner ones, which pro- 
I duces a rich effect. 

The doorways are seldom without the drip-stone, terminated 
with its head, or other ornament: it is not so often continued 
on the walls and around buttresses as formerly. 

The capitals of the shafts, when plain, have two or three 
sets of moldings, with the bell, and molded astragal at the 
neck ; when with foliage, the capital differs from the Early 
English in being more compact, less relieved and without the 
stems-of the leaves on the neck. 

The base moldings are plain and simple, a reversed ogee, 
or other peculiar form, single or repeated. 

The moldings of the doorways are less complex ; in some 
instances not so good as those of the last style, and less 
relieved or undercut. 

inappropriate as a general name, when there is often no semblance of a roof or nny 
approximation to it. The ogee drip-atone, could with the same propriety, )*e designated 
** gabled,” for there are ogee gables, ns well as angular gables. But the term “ gabled” 
cannot be properly applied to that which has no roof. 


Digitized by Google 



DECORATED ENGLISH STYLE. 85 !j 

When enrichment is introduced, it consists of the peculiar 
ball-flower, placed at intervals in the hollow moldings; and 
also the ball-flower and four-leaved flowers combined with 
stalks and leaves. 

It is not unusual to find several hollows in a single doorway 
filled with these enrichments. 

The door is either simply paneled, or ornamented with the 
exterior iron hinge and its scroll work, but the latter is less 
frequent than in the previous style. 

tDinboujs. 

The transition from the Early English style was accom- 
plished in a comparatively short space of time, yet so gradu- 
ally, and with such an easy flow of one form into another, as 
fairly to establish a new and peculiar style before the old one 
was quite dismissed. 

For instance, in the doublet window, or where two single 
i openings are placed side by side, and the intermediate space 
between their arches and the single arched drip-stone is 
pierced by an oval, the Early English style is recognized. 

We trace the transition from this form to the Decorated in a 
slight reduction of the center pier, more acutely pointed open- 
ings extending further upward, and the oval lost in the inter- 
section of their lines, producing a lozenge-shaped perforation, 
all encompassed as before with a drip-stone. 

Then, again, there is a more definite change in the intro- 
duction of the mullion, arising out of the reduced pier, the 
circle in the place of the former oval and lozenge, with the 
intermediate spaces smaller and conforming to the size of the 
mullion with their soffit cusping ; a change which shows the 



Digitized by Google 




80 ANALYSIS OF THE 


development of geometrical tracery or the Decorated window 
at the beginning of the style. 

There are numerous examples of two-light windows of this 
construction, varied in design, although windows of the great- 
est width and number of lights are not foreign to parish 
churches of this period. 

The tracery of the windows may be divided into two 
classes; the geometrical and the flowing ; the former consists 
of geometrical forms, such as the circle, the lozenge, trefoil, 
quatrefoil et cetera; the latter, of the same forms harmoni- 
ously and gracefully blended in the same design by the assist- 
ance of flowing lines. Geometrical tracery is the oldest, 
though not so much confined to any definite period as to 
admit of a regular classification, since it continued to be used, 
after the introduction of flowing tracery. 

During the progress of this style, there was seen a great 
I and beautiful change in the deepening of the exterior window 
jamb. Where the jamb moldings were formerly simple, and 
the glass but slightly recessed, several planes of moldings or 
splays in the jambs and mullions were now substituted, the 
chief of these pervading the entire design, with others sub- 
servient. In some instances the exterior or principal mold- 
ings have capitals and bases, giving them the appearance of 
shafts ; and, in others, the shaft is more developed, with the 
arch or tracery moldings falling upon its capital. 

The mullions, tracery and jambs are sometimes enriched 
with the ball-flower placed at intervals, with good effect. 


Digitized by Google 



DECORATED ENGLISH STYLE. 87 


The drip-stones of the windows are similar to those of the 
doors. 

The arches of the windows are most commonly equilateral, 
though there are examples with both the lancet and drop 
arch : the square-headed window is sometimes used, as well 
as the segmental. 

Clear-story windows of this style, where confined to parish 
churches, are very small, and with but few peculiarities. The 
most common forms are the circle, the spherical triangle and j 
the square, rarely filled with elaborate tracery, but most fre- 
quently simply trefoiled or quatrefoiled. The interior is 
generally of a different form from the exterior, oftenest that 
of the square with its head arched and its jambs widely 
splayed. 

Piers anil ^rrl)es. 

The plan of the Decorated pier is quite simple. Its shafts 
are engaged, and cut out of the same material with the other 
members of the pier; and in this respect and also in the 
squareness of its general outline, lies its principal difference 
from the Early English pier. 

The octagonal pier, of more delicate proportion than the 
same pier of the last style, is sometimes used, with either 
plain or ornamented capitals. Another simple and peculiar 
plan is that in which the shafts are four semi-circles attached 
to the sides of a square, with their circumferences touching 
at its angles. 

These several varieties do not appear to have been so 
common during the latter years of the style as the pier of 


Digitized by Google 



88 ANALYSIS OF THE 


four shafts, about two fifths engaged, and, between them, a 
fillet and a deep hollow half as large as the shafts. 

Although the filleted shaft was first used by the Early 
English architects, it may be classed as a characteristic feature 
of this style. 

The capitals are either plain, with single or double sets of 
moldings, and the bell and astragal ; or they are enriched 
with the foliage peculiar to the Decorated style. 

The bases are most generally simple and with but few 
moldings. 

The plain chamfered arch was in common use with the 
octagonal pier, and, in many instances, in churches that were 
otherwise highly embellished. The ogee form was sometimes 
employed in the nave arches. 

Buttresses. 

The buttress, with its arrangements of set-offs, gables and 
pinnacles, is a distinguishing feature in the several styles of 
Gothic architecture ; and it is not a less important feature in 
construction. 

Decorated buttresses are usually divided into stages, and 
with less difference between the projection and the width 
than in either of the other styles. 

Their set-offs are either plain or relieved by the gablet 
sometimes trefoiled. In some instances the set-offs are quite 
diminutive, and occasionally a mere drip stone is used that 
but slightly marks the difference of projection in the stages. 

The gabled buttress was more frequently used in this style 


jitized by Google 




DECORATED ENGLISH STYLE. 89 


than in any other, and it was not unusual to adorn the face 
of the upper stage with a molded panel or a trefoil-headed 
niche. 

Its terminations are various ; they are either below the 
parapet, or carried up to its highest member, or they pass 
through it and finish in a gable or pinnacle. 

The base table is often without any moldings, consisting 
simply of one or more plain slopes or set-offs. That most 
common is the reversed ogee molding and two plain faces 
below with a slope between them. Sometimes either of these 
base tablets is continued on the wall ; there are however in- 
stances where both the wall and buttress are without any 
base, and also where that of the buttress is not continued 
on the wall. 

ittol&amp;ittgs. 

In the early part of this style, rounds and hollows, with 
the several varieties of the filleted bowtel, were used, resem- 
bling in many respects those of the last style, but differing 
from them in the common use of fillets between the larger 
members, and having less depth of hollows that are arcs of 
decided circles. 

As the style advanced, many of the most marked features 
of the moldings just noticed, were abandoned. The filleted 
bowtel gradually merged into the perfect wave mold, pe- 
culiar to this style. Sunken splays or chamfers were 
frequently introduced ; and the scroll molding formed of 
two segments of a circle of unequal size, is a characteristic 
of this style. 

At a later period the ogee molding became quite common, 


12 


Digitized by Google 



90 ANALYSIS OF THE 


and led to the formation of the double-ogee molding so much 
used in the Perpendicular style. 

All the combinations were made with much more geomet- 
rical precision than in the former style, but their arrangements 
were more easy and graceful, arising from the use in Decorated 
arches of the chamfer plane in connection with the rectangular 
planes of Early English arches. 

The enrichments are numerous ; those most frequently met 
with are leaves, the square-flower and the ball-flower, either 
separately or in connected patterns with vines between them. 

The ball-flower, so called from its resemblance to a ball 
inclosed by three or four petals, is peculiar to this style, and 
was often introduced with fine effect. Heads, shields and 
other ornaments were sometimes used. 

ttoofs. 

There is little perceptible difference between the roofs of 
the earlier years of this style and those of the style imme- 
diately preceding it The truss-rafter-roof still continued to 
be in use, though there was a preference given to that of 
seven cants. The latter is often boarded on the underside of 
the timbers, below the lowest collar beam, and divided into 
panels by rib moldings that are ornamented with carved 
wooden bosses or flowers, at their intersections; with this 
construction the cants were more equally divided than when 
left open or unceiled. 

All that is necessary to be said concerning the inclinations 
of the wooden roofs of this period may be found by reference 


Digitized by Google 



DECORATED ENGLISH STYLE. 61 


to the remark on this topic in the corresponding chapter 
treating of the Early English period. 

As the Decorated style advanced, circular or carved braces 
were substituted for the angular or diagonal ones. Some- 
times they were carried down on the walls, terminating in 
carved corbels of figures or other devices, adding both greater 
strength and beauty to the roof. 

Occasionally the octagonal king post with molded base and 
capital was again employed, throwing, from its new position, 
a portion of the weight of the roof upon the collar beam, in- 
stead of upon the tie beam as formerly. 

In ancient Gothic roofs, the manner of using the tie beam 
differed in principle from its modern mode of use. The tie 
beam w T as used both to assist in stiffening and to hold in their 
proper positions the exterior walls, and at the same time it 
received the weight of the roof vertically. 

To gain additional strength, the tie beam was cambered, 
and there are some Decorated examples where the tie beam 
answers for rafters as well, — having been hewn out of one 
large piece of timber, with curved braces continuing from 
the camber of the beam and distributing part of its load on 
the walls. 

The low tie beam roof was frequently used towards the 
latter part of this period. 

Decorated roofs are various and of great beauty ; some 
being truly beautiful in their unadorned simplicity, while 
others are skilfully embellished to relieve what would appear 
nude if destitute of ornament. 


Digitized by Google 






mo. MU Jotrn'a. Wine hosier. 


ANALYSIS, ETC. 


Enrichments of various kinds peculiar to the style were 
carved upon the timbers, and it was during the Decorated 
period that the Gothic archit ects excellod'&amp;ll others in the 
beauty of their designs lor wood-won; and in the excellence 
of their execution. 


i 

J 

i 


i 

i 

i 

i 

i 


♦ 


Digitized by Google 


U i' r u rati- £» . 



(Ground lan . 


Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



Prraralrb. 


• III. 





Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



S'mifl) &lt;£lf vntion. 



Digitized by Google 


IsTTT 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 




. FIG. 2. 

L 

J 





DESIGN III. 
■ 1 1 1 

Drraratr &amp;. 

PLATE VI. 



Digitized by Google 


Digitized by Google 




3 r t n t n t e i&gt; 


dp.sigu rv 


33 t t s pr r t i u r t3 1 r tu 

-from tl]f $orlij THest 


Digitized by Google 


^Description of tt)c plates. 


DESIGN HI. 


«. it 

Chancel, 20 by 25 

Nave, 25 by 50 

Sacristy, 8 by 10 


North Transept, / |6 by , 6 


South Transept, 
North Porch, . 


7 by 7 


South Porch, 7 by 7. 

Platt I. 

Perspective View taken from the North West. 

Platt II. 

Horizontal Section or Ground Plan. 


A. Chancel. 

B. Nave. 

C. North Quasi-Transept. 

D. South Quasi-Transept. 


E. Sacristy. 

F. Organ Chapel. 

G. North Porch. 

H. South Porch. 


Plate III. 

Geometrical View of the West Fagadc. 

Plate IV. 

Geometrical.View of the South Fajade, with the apex of the Spire omitted. 
(See West Facade.) 

Plate V. 

Geometrical View of a Vertical Section of the Design, taken from North 
to South, looking East. 

Plate VI. 

Analysis or the Design. 


Fig. 1 . Geometrical Drawing of one of the Nave Windows. ) — Iiuli 

“ 2. Horizontal Section of the same. I 


Digitized by Google 




DECORATED ENGLISH STYLE. P5 

Plate V. 


Geometrical View of a Vertical Section of the Design, taken from North 

to South, looking East. 


Plate VI. 


Geometrical View of a Vertical Section of the Design, taken from East to 

West, looking North. 


Plate VII. 


Analysis of the Design. 



Sc ALB. 

Fig. 1. Geometrical Drawing of the West Window in the 


v 

IS ave. 

- 4 ft. = Inch. 

u 2. Horizontal Section of the same. J 


44 3. Geometrical Drawing of Chancel Cross. 

2 ft. = Inch. 

“ 4. Geometrical Drawing of one of the Bosses at. the 

1 ft. = Inch 

intersection of the Ribs of the Nave Roof. 

and half 

Plate VIII. 


Analysis of the Design (continued). 



SCALK 

Fig. 1. Geometrical View of West Door. 

4 ft. = Inch. 

44 2. Section of Archivolt Moldings to the same at the 

1 ft. = Inch 

Spring of the Arch. 

and half. 

44 3. Section of the Shalt and the Jamb Moldings to the 


B&amp;me below the Spring of the Arch. 


“ 4. V ertical Section of the Capitals to the Shafts of the 


West Door. 

1 ft. = Inch 

“ 6, Vertical Section of the Base to the Shafts of the 

and half. 

same. 


M 6. Vertical Section of the Base Molding around the 


Building. 


“ 7. Section of the Archivolt to the Arches of the Nave, 


at the Spring of the Arch. 

2 ft. = Inch. 

44 8. Vertical Section of the Base to the Nave Piers. 

1 ft. = Inch 

44 ft. Vertical Section of the Capitals to the Nave Piers. 

and half. 

“ 10. Geometrical Drawing of the Ends of the Pews, 


with a Vertical Section, showing the Seat, the 


Back, et cetera. 

2 ft. = Inch. 

“11. Geometrical View of the Front and Side of one of 

1 ft. = Inch 

the Buttresses to the Aisles of the Nave. 

and half. 

'The Sittings are about 720 in number. 


Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



(Ground "}Jlntt. 


Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



W t s t (fli-watian. 


Digitized by Google 


Digitized by Google 


DE3IGK IV. ; - ■ ' PLATE IV. 



Digitized by Google 






4 


11 


&gt; 4 

it r 

A . f- — 


u. 


Digitized by Google 



Brmratrii 





r 



Digitized by Google 


i onjituiHnitl £*rrtion. 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 


DESIGN iV 


P rraratci* . 


T'LAT F. VIII 



mu 


no. i. 


Digitized by Google 





J 

r "^1 


Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 




$frpm£) Ir ular. 



$ f rsyfrtiue feutu 



JJerjjeniricular (Bnglisl) Style 


“ thy decay 

la still impregnate with divinity. 
Which gilds it with revivifying ray 


ERPENDICULAR Gothic architect- 
4 r i ( urp P reva 'i®^ through a period of 
’l^nvv// a * &gt;&lt;mt one hundred and seventy 
I ! Mij | :( years. It succeeded the Decorated 
! u style in the beginning of the reign 
. ! °f R' n g Richard II., or nbout the 

, year one thousand three hundred 

(f and seventy-seven, and continued to 

the latter part of the reign of King Henry 
If VIII., of about the middle of the sixteenth 
II century. 

According to the chronology of some 
writers, the limit of its career might be ex- 
tended a century later; but so to prolong the 
Perpendicular era would be great injustice to the 
_ style, which now constitutes a 
I distinct- and pure class of Gothic 

architecture. It possesses its 
^ 'V ' - own peculiarities, which are 


is 


Digitized by Google 



PERPENDICULAR ENGLISH STYLE. 99 


The Perpendicular style may have more modern advocates 
than the Early English and the Decorated ; yet to disparage 
these styles, for the purpose of exalting the former, can only 
argue the advocates’ ignorance in art. Not more judiciously 
can the beautiful intricacies of the Perpendicular style be 
sacrificed to the grand simplicity of the Early English or the 
graceful combinations of the Decorated. Some of its works, 
executed even during the period of its most debased state, 
still remain to 

“ Shame the weak efforts of art’s latest stage.” 

“ As the habit of gazing on peculiar forms, by degrees 
begets a taste for them, and as those which utility first de- 
mands, even when that utility ceases, still are perpetuated by 
the inclination it produces — as even consistency and taste 
require the ornamental additions to harmonize in their outline 
and character with the fundamental groundwork ; those essen- 
tial forms, all slender and tall and sharp; those long thin pil- 
lars; those narrow and lofty interstices; those pointed arches, 
reduplicated laterally and over each other in endless repeti- 
tions and intersecting each other in every way, were imitated 
and repeated and carried to innumerable lesser and more 
minute subdivisions in the mere ornamental parts, until at 
last, religious edifices, with their pinnacles, and spires and 
broaches, and cusps and corbels and tabernacles and tracery 
and ridge bands, looked like a mass of network, or rather a 
cluster of mere conductors, ******* and after having 
attained the greatest sharpness, at least, as if weak with old 
age and sinking, it exhibited a depression in its arches, and 
even a bulging downwards in the form of pendants, ere it was 
completely overthrown, and dissolved.”* 

° Hope’s Historical Essay on Architecture. 


Digitized by Google 



100 ANALYSIS OF THE 


The overthrow of Gothic architecture in England, or more 
particularly the Perpendicular, the last of the Gothic styles, 
concluding a long and brilliant career of art-, has been attrib- 
uted to the introduction, by foreign artists, of the Italian 
' style. This opinion does not seem to be correct, if we mi- 
nutely examine the component parts of the debased archi- 
tecture, struggling to uphold itself in its degenerate state at 
! the time of the opportune importation of the foreign style. 
There was a yearning, an almost perceptible leauing towards 
a new style, that might have resulted, had its progress been 
unretarded, in a semblance at least of the Italian style. This 
tendency is apparent in the introduction, as a principle, of 
horizontal lines throughout the design — to a degree so fre- 
quent, indeed, that, in most instances, they predominated 
over the vertical lines, but were nevertheless made, by skilful 
management, to harmonize with them. 

It was by thus mingling the horizontal with the vertical, 
while the former predominated, that the Perpendicular was 
fully prepared to receive and engraft upon its stock any scion 
; of congenial nature. Hence the Italian was ultimately revived 
through the mongrel and short-lived transition, called the 
i Elizabethan. 

Doorways. 

As in all the styles of architecture, notwithstanding there 
may be sufficient allowance made for a transition from one to 
another, there will always linger a remnant of some conspicu- 
ous form whereon to engraft fresh inventions, and, by a com- 
bination entirely original, to create new peculiarities that can 
be classed as belonging to a particular epoch. 

The principle is particularly illustrated in the beginning of 


Digitized by Google 



1 I 

PERPENDICULAR ENGLISH STYLE. 101 

__ 

! this style. The pointed arched doorway of the Decorated 
style was still retained, with its accompanying ogee drip- 
stone, though the latter was arranged, in the desigu, as sub- 
servient to the new inventions of the period. At first, the 
outer moldings were carried up vertically and at right angles 
with those running horizontally over the doorway, and thus 
forming an approximation to right-angled triangles, with the I 
hypotenuse of an ogee form ; the inclosed spaces commonly 
known as spandrels, were generally ornamented at this transi- 
tion period, with the circle variously foiled. 

This seems to be the incipient state of the square labeled 
doorway so characteristic of the Perpendicular style. Occa- 
sionally the vertical moldings of the label were continued 
upward to meet the tower drip-stone, in this design, and, at 
a subsequent period, when the four-centered arch was intro- 
duced, the ogee drip-stone was laid aside, and greater promi- 
nence was given to an independent, square drip-stone or 
label. The spandrels thus formed were now filled either with 
circles, armorial bearings, or rich foliage of great variety of 
design. 

The moldings — generally worked on the chamfer plane, 
though not with the precision of the last style — are either 
continuous, finishing on the chamfer; or those most prominent 
terminate with bases; or those of the arch are carried on 
small shafts. The latter have octagonal capitals that are vari- 
ously molded — generally with the cyma-recta as the principal 
— or are sometimes enriched with foliage peculiar to the style ; 
and octagonal bases, easily recognized by their peculiar stilted 
character and ogee moldings. 

In small doorways, the spandrel and square drip-stone are 


Digitized by Google 



102 ANALYSIS OF THE 


sometimes omitted, and the drip-stone is made to conform to 
the. four-centered arch of the doorway. 

The doors at this period were ornamented with elegant 
traceried panels, instead of the iron scroll work common to 
the previous styles'; though perhaps as many are still found 
quite plain, or without any embellishment, save that of orna- 
mented nail heads. 

toirtiiotos. 

The windows in ancient Gothic structures are the principal 
criteria by which certain peculiarities of a style are most easily 
discerned. In the preceding style, the flowing tracery stamps 
it as Decorated at once ; while in the style we are now con- 
sidering it is not more difficult to arrive at a correct conclu- 
sion from the prevalence throughout of tracery of a vertical 
or perpendicular character. 

The super-mullion was still continued, and became by its 
common use almost a characteristic of this style. It is em- 
ployed mostly in large windows to define or separate sections 
or combinations of lights, while the intermediate spaces are 
subdivided into smaller lights of great variety of form. 

The outer member of the principal mullion is more fre- 
quently made continuous than divided by a capital ; but with 
this arrangement the peculiar base continues still in use. 

The transom was occasionally used by architects towards 
the latter part of the Decorated period, but was distinguished 
by much simplicity : and, as the windows of the succeeding 


Digitized by Google 





PERPENDICULAR ENGLISH STYLE. 103 


style became enlarged by the addition of a greater number 
of lights, this useful member seems to have been called into 
immediate requisition, and it afterwards attained such impor- 
tance as to constitute a marked characteristic of the Perpen- 
dicular style. 

As in the doorways, so was the four-centered arch employed 
in the windows, at the time when the Perpendicular may be 
said to have reached its zenith. With the introduction of this 
feature, there appears a revulsion in the arrangement of the 
window tracery, or at least greater encouragement was given 
to the construction of the tracery below the spring of the arch, 
making the arch look as if it were stilted. 

Tracery, having the appearance of pierced foliated panels, 
reduplicated throughout, subsequently pervaded the general 
design ; and in some examples the square drip-stone of the 
doorways, with its ornamented spandrels, is used in the 
window. 

Other arches besides the pointed and four-centered were 
used at a late period, generally partaking of a debased char- 
acter and unworthy of the student’s attention. 

Clear-stories became in this style one of the principal and 
most conspicuous features of the nave, and therefore greater 
improvement is to be remarked in the windows belonging 
to them. 

The square-headed, the pointed, and the four-centered arch 
were those most frequently used, and sometimes the windows 
were so closely placed as to reduce the intermediate piers to 
a less width than that of the openings. 


Digitized by Google 




104 ANALYSIS OF THE 


Piers an &amp; ^rcljcs. 

While we find at times in this style many of the forms 
common to the previous styles, ornamented with purely 
Perpendicular moldings, it has still its own peculiar forms. 
There is the lozenge-shaped 'pier, or the square, placed 
diamond-wise, and contracted between the arches from east 
to west, which is distinctive of this style ; and so also is the 
manner of continuing certain moldings of the pier up into 
the arch without interruption at its spring. 

In some examples, the small pier shaft is entirely omitted, 
and all of the pier moldings are continued in a similar manner 
j up into the arch. 

The capitals of the shafts are foliated, or have the moldings 
peculiar to the style, and the semi-octagonal neck. 

The base has the ogee molding, and its plinth is semi- 
octagonal and very much stilted. 

I 

The arches vary from the acute-pointed to the four-centered ; 
the latter may be said to have superseded all others towards 
I the conclusion of the period. 

buttresses. 

The most marked change in the buttress consists in the 
reduction of its width and an incroaso of its projection. The 
favorite manner of working it was in two stages — though 
more were not infrequent — with plain slopes or set-offs gene- 
| rally at a sharp angle, or with very little inclination. These 
weatherings were often a series of moldings peculiar to the 
j style. 


Digitized by Google 




PERPENDICULAR ENGLISH STYLE. ins 


While pinnacles in the Decorated style, were chiefly con- 
fined to turrets and to particular parts of a building, they 
were in this style more fully developed and made common to 
all parts — as well in the aisles as the clear-story and the 
chancel. 

The crocketed and finial’d gable and the paneled faces of 
the buttress are also common to this style. 

Angular buttresses were often used, but not with the same 
frequency as in the last style.* 

The base sometimes consists of a series of moldings, with 
their intervening tablets ; but that which was most often used, 
is the shallow ogee with hollows, splays and tablets. 

iltolbings. 

In the combinations of the Early English style it will have 
been observed that there is an equilibrium prevailing between 
the moldings and the hollows, or that as great importance is 
given to the one as to the other. But as we proceed to the 
Decorated style there is a more consistent combination of 
moldings and hollows ; the former are more in groups and 
divided by the latter, giving greater character and import 
ance to the primary instead of the secondary parts of com- 
binations of moldings. Again, as we advance still further, 
in the Perpendicular style this perfect combination seems 
entirely lost and forgotten, and the hollow predominates, and 
is expanded to its utmost capacity, the moldings becoming 
mere appendages, instead of primary forms. 

° The angular buttress is not peculiar to any one period of tfotbic architecture, but 
in common to all. 


14 


Digitized by Google 



10« ANALYSIS OF THE 


There is no feature of this style that so readily marks its 
transition or debasement from a purer architecture, as its 
moldings. 

The hollow becomes, as the style advances, a shallow case- 
ment. The moldings are connected without regard to beauty 
of effect. The bead and the wave molding of the last style, 
and the double ogee are, though in common use throughout 
this style, of little character, because of the shallowness of 
their segments. The ogee molding, used in all the styles, 
was very common in this ; but, like most of the other Per- 
pendicular moldings, it is ineffective through its want of bold 
outline and sufficient depth of shadow. 

A characteristic, and a growth of this style is the undu- 
lating molding, or a combination of the wave and the ogee 
moldings, somewhat resembling the bowtel of the last style, 
with its single fillet rounded, though much inferior. 

To the open and naked character of the hollow used with 
the moldings, doubtless may be attributed the great variety 
and superabundance of enrichment peculiar to this style; it 
has flowers, fruit, heads, animals, clumps of leaves or flowers, 
and escutcheons, either single or in running patterns, and 
generally well executed. 

The Tudor flower, a growth of this style, is ordinarily used 
as a battlement, or placed upon the transoms of windows. 

Hoofs. 

Of roofs of this period I have to note three varieties. 
They may be classed respectively as the hammer-beam roof, 
the collar-braced roof and the tie-beam roof. The first of these 


Digitized by Google 




PERPENDICULAR ENGLISH STYLE. 107 


may be said to have originated in the early part of this 
i period, though it was not in general use until much later. 

Some writers have explained its origin by supposing that 
the central portion of the tie-beam was sawn out, in an already 
constructed roof ; the abundance of lateral resistance found 
in the walls and buttresses, kept the roof equally as secure. 

To the hammer-beam roof, in its incipient state, vertical 
wall pieces and curved braces were afterwards added, both 
above and below, which carried the superincumbent weight 
to the walls, yielded additional support, and relieved the roof 
of its former angular outline. 

The collar-braced roof seems to have grown out of the roof 
just ' described ; the projection of the hammer-beams grew 
gradually less and less, the braces which they supported still 
following them, until, nearly united with the braces below the 
hammer-beam, their contour appeared a continuation of the 
principal arched braces carried to the walls. Thus originated 
the collar-braced roof. 

In this construction the hammer-beam was entirely omitted, 
and the principal arched braces were framed into the vertical 
pieces placed against the walls. 

The tie-beam roof was most commonly used in the latter 
part of this period. In some examples the pitch or inclina- 
tion of the roof is very low — so low, indeed, that often it 
admits of no framework, but is supported by a tie-beam cam- 
bered and constituting a principal. 

This defect in the elevation of the interiors of the Perpen- 
dicular naves was to some extent obviated by the introduc- 
tion of braces into the angles formed by the tie-beam and 
the external walls — the braces being so united with the tie- 



Digitized by Google 




108 ANALYSIS, ETC. 


beam (or rafter) that the whole appears as one continuous 
wooden arch. 

• 

All of these forms of roof admit of great variety of orna- 
ment. Sometimes the rafters are ceiled, and the spaces be- 
tween the principals are subdivided with panels, with molded 
ribs, and adorned with tracery. It was not unusual to carve 
the hammer-beams so as to represent angels, in various atti- 
tudes, bearing shields and other appropriate emblems. 

Although many roofs of this period are extremely simple 
and devoid of ornament, the greater part of them abound in 
embellishments, of pierced traceried panels, niches, figures, 
and the Tudor and other flowers. 



Font. 8 Andrew. Histon • 


• Cbarche* of Cembrltlge»hlr&amp; 



Digitized by Google 


DfcSlUN V 


"p rrp t niiirular. 


1 !ATt r 



(ijruunb ^ lan. 


Digitized by Google 


Digitized by Google 



"J.1 rrjirn&amp;irular. 



Digitized by Google 


tfitst (flroattun . 






Digitized by Google 



r.iitsvi’rsr S'ffttint . 






Digitized by Google 


DESIGN V 



Digitized by Google 




Digitized by Google 


V 


11 i*vp eniiirul a v . 





be: 



FIG. 7. 


KIG.G 


Id 


— ^ 




-r— ' 

id 

‘‘I 



A it a l !1 n i n . 


Digitized by Google 


Digitized by Google 


DFSIGN VI 


rpmft irnlar 


PLATE 1 





r 


description of tl)c plates. 


DESIGN V. 


ft. n. 

Chancel, 22 by 27 

Nave, 22 by flo 

Sacristy, 9 by 10 


North Transept, 1 g2 . 2g 
South Transept, 1 
North Porch, . . 8 by 9 


South Porch, 8 by 9. 

Plate I. 

Perspective View taken from the South West. 
Plate II. 

Horizontal Section or Ground Plan. 


A. Chancel. 

B. Nave. 

C. North Transept. 


D. South Transept. 

E. Sacristy. 

F. North Porch. 


G. South Porch. 

Plate III. 

Geometrical View of the East Facade. 


Plate VI. 

» . Analysis of the Design. 

Fig. 1 . Geometrical Drawing of the North and South Win- 
dows of the Transepts. 

“ 2. Horizontal Section of a part of the same. 

!rSfcA5^^‘- . 


| 4 ft. = 


- • *■ {fi 

Inch. 


m ’ • ■■ 

\"-K 

* V Plate IV. 

Geometrical View of a Vertical Section of the Design, taken from North 
to South, looking East. 

J ** • plate V. 

Geometrical View of the North Facade. 


Digitized by Google 


PERPENDICULAR ENGLISH STYLE. Ill 

Plate V. 

Geometrical View of a Vertical Section of the Design, taken from North 

to South, looking West. 

1 

Plate VI. 

Geometrical View of a Vertical Section of the Design, taken from East to 

West, looking North. 

Plate VII. 

Analysis of the Design. 

Scale. 

Fig. 1. Geometrical Drawing of the East Window in the 'j 
Chancel. &gt; 

4 ft. = Inch. 

“ 2. Horizontal Section of the same. J 

“ 3. Section of the Arch, Drip-Stone, and Mullion to 
the East Window in the Chancel. 

1 ft. = Inch. 

“ 4. Geometrical Drawing of one of the Spandrels to 
the West Door. 

2 ft. = Inch. 

Plate Till. 

Analysis of the Design (continued). 

Fig. 1. Geometrical Drawing of the West Door in the 
Tower. 

Scale. 

4 ft. = Inch. 

44 2. Horizontal Section of the Shafts and Jamb Mold- 
ings to the same. 

1 ft. = Inch. . 

“ 3. Vertical Section of the Base Molding to the Shafts 

1 ft. = Inch 

of the West Door in the Tower. 

and half. 

M 4. Vertical Section of the Base Moldings to the 
Tow'er — the lower ones of which are continued 
around the Building. 

1 ft. = Inch. 

“ 5. Geometrical Drawing of ono of the Nave Piers, 
with a part of one of the Nave Arches. 

4 ft. = Inch. 

“ C. Horizontal Section — half of ono of the Nave Piers 
at the Base and at the Capital. 

2 ft. = Inch. 

M 7 . Vertical Sections of the Capital and the Base to 
the Nave Piers. 

1 ft. = Inch. 

“ 8. Vertical Section of the Parapet to the Aisles, with’ 
a Profile of one of the Gargoyles. 

2 ft. = Inch. 

“ 9. Geometrical Drawing of the Set-offs to the Tow- 
er Buttresses. 

4 ft. = Inch. 

The Sittings are about 510 in number. 



*°i &lt;um 


Digitized by Google 




AO/ 


Digitized by Google 



^Jrrpm&amp;irnlnr . 


DESIGN VJ. 


PUTE II. 



J GU~aa.H ~ t -An* 


( f &gt; r u u n i&gt; "Plan. 


Digitized by Google 




Digitized by Google 


I'Ebk-N 


I’rprnftirMlav. 



West (i’lnialimt. 


Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 


plju'- :v 












Digitized by Google 


$ Hit til matt Hit. 


Digitized by Coogle 


"V rrprntif rular. 



Cranswrrsf jS'crtion. 


Digitized by Google 


Digitized by Google 



"Pi’rjjrnlitrular 



Digitized by Google 


mupj* |uuiiinj}tiu0j|f 





Digitized by Google 


'yrrprndirular. 



JV n a 1 (1 s i s. 


Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



BES1GI VT 


"P rrprnftmtlar. 



A n a 1 r\ tf i s . 


Digitized by Google 


Digitized by Google 





Digitized by Googk 
















