{title medium "THE CITY"}
{title small "OF"}
{title large "CARCASSONNE"}

{frontmatter x-small "BY"}
{frontmatter small "VIOLLET-LE-DUC"}

{image small "title"}

{frontmatter small "ÉDITIONS ALBERT MORANCÉ"}

--page 1
{section "HISTORY"}

About the year 636 of Rome, the Senate, on the
advice of Lucius Crassus, having decided that a
Roman colony should be established at Narbonne, the
border of the Pyrenees was soon provided with important
posts in order to keep the passages into Spain
and defend the course of the rivers. The « Voices Tectosages »,
having opposed no resistance to the Roman
armies, the Republic granted to the inhabitants of
Carcassonne, Lodève, Nîmes, Pézenas and Toulouse, the
privilege of governing themselves according to their
laws and under their magistrates. The year 70 a. J.-C.,
Carcassonne was classed with cities said to be {_noble_}
or {_elected_}. The fate of Carcassonne since then down
to the fourth century is unknown. Like all the cities
of Southern Gaul, it enjoyed profound peace, but,
after the disasters of the Empire, it was only considered
as a citadel ({_castellum_}). In 350 the Franks took
it but, soon after, the Romans entered it again.

In 407 the Goths penetrated into the « Narbonnaise
première », laid that province waste, passed into
--page 2
Spain, and, in 436, Theodoric, king of the Visigoths,
took Carcassonne. According to the treaty of peace
which he concluded with the Empire in 439, he remained
possessor of that city with all its territory, and
the « Novempopulanie » situated to the West of Toulouse.

It is during that reign of the Visigoths that the
inward city wall was built on the ruins of the Roman
fortifications. And, in fact, most of the Visigoth
towers still standing are laid upon Roman substructions
which appear to have been built in haste, probably
at the time of the Frank invasions. The bases
of the Visigoth towers are square or have been
roughly rounded off to sustain the defence-works of
the Vth century.

On the Southern side of the city-wall we notice
basements of towers built with enormous blocks laid
over each other without any mortar and which belong
certainly to the time of the Empire's decay. Whatever
be the case it is still easy to-day to follow the whole
wall of the Visigoths (See the general plan fig. 16).
	{^Excavations have allowed us to trace the foundations of that
	wall on the points were it was destroyed at the end of the XIIIth
	century in order to increase the perimeter of the city.^}
That wall had an oval shape with a slight depression
on the western side following the configuration of the
hill on which it was built. The towers, separated by a
space or about 25 to 30 metres, are outwardly cylindric,
ending in a square inside the town and joined
together by high curtains (fig. 1). The whole Visigoth
construction is built in layers of ashlars, about 0 m. 10
or 0 m. 12 in height, with rows of large alternated
bricks. Wide semi-circular bays are opened in the
cylindric part of those towers, on the side looking
--page 3
{figure large "Figure 1." "figure1"}
--page 4
to the country slightly above the level of the town;
they were provided with wooden shutters with horizontal
pivots and served as loop-holes. Those towers
were crowned with covered battlements. From the
curtain-watches the towers were reached through gate
with lintels in the shape of surbased arches relieved by
a semi-circular arch in brick. A wooden staircase
inside made the lower story communicate with the
higher battlements which opened towards the town
by an arch pierced through the gable.

In spite of the modifications brought in the defence-system
of those towers during the XIIth and XIIIth
centuries, we still find all the traces of the Visigoth
constructions. Down to the level of the ground of the
curtain-watches those towers are entirely solid and
thus present a powerful mass calculated to resist saps
and batteringrams.

The Visigoths, among all the Barbarian peoples who
invaded the East were those who assimilated most
rapidly the remains of the Roman arts, at least with
regard to military constructions and, indeed, those of
Carcassonne are quite similar to those used about the
end of Empire in Italy and in Gaul. They understood
the value of the situation of Carcassonne and made
it the center of their possessions in the Narbonnaise.

The table-land on which the city of Carcassonne is
built commands the valley of the Aude, which flows
at the foot of the said table-land, and, consequently,
the natural road from Narbonne to Toulouse. It rises
between the Black Moutain and the slopes of the
Pyrenees, precisely at the top of the angle formed by
the river Aude on leaving those steep slopes to turn
off towards the East. Carcassonne happens thus to
bestride the only valley which leads from the Mediterranean
--page 5
to the Ocean, and is besides at the entrance
of the passes which penetrate into Spain through
Limoux, Alet, Quillan, Mont-Louis, Livia, Puicerda or
Campredon. — The seat of the city had thus been
perfectly chosen, and it had already been taken by
the Romans who, before the Visigoths, meant to
dispose of all the passages from the Narbonnaise into
Spain.

But the Romans found, via Narbonne, a shorter and
easier road to enter Spain and they had only made
Carcassonne a citadel ({_castellum_}) whereas the Visigoths,
settling in the country after long efforts, probably
preferred a place defended by nature and situated
in the center of their possessions this side of the
Pyrenees to a town like Narbonne built on flat land,
difficult to defend and keep. Events proved that they
had not been mistaken; in fact Carcassonne was their
last refuge when they were in their turn, at war with
the Franks and the Burgundians.

In 508 Clovis laid siege to Carcassonne and was
obliged to break up his camp without having succeeded
in taking the town.

In 588 the city opened its gates to Austrovalde,
duke of Toulouse, for king Gontran; but, soon after,
the French army having been defeated by Claude,
duke of Lusitania, Carcassonne fell again into the
powder of Reccarede, king of the Visigoths.

It was in 713 that the kingdom ended; the Moors of
Spain then became possessors of Septimany. We can
only make vague conjectures as to what befell Carcassonne
during four centuries; between the domination
of the Visigoths and the beginning of the
XIIth century we find no certain traces of constructions
in the city any more than on its walls. But, from
--page 6
the end of the XIth century, important works were
undertaken on several points. In 1096 the pope
Urbain II came to Carcassonne to reestablish peace
between Bernard Aton and the citizens who had
rebelled against him and he blessed the cathedral
(St-Nazaire) as well as the materials prepared to
finish it. It is to that time indeed that the building of
the nave of the church can be ascribed.

Under Bernard Aton the « bourgeoisie » of Carcassonne
had formed a militia and peace does not seem
to have reigned between that lord and his vassals, for
the latter, beaten by the troops of Alphonse, count of
Toulouse, who had come to Bernard's rescue, were
obliged to submit and give warrants of their fidelity
to find bail. The goods of the chief rebels were confiscated
in favour of the few vassals who had remained
loyal and Bernard Aton gave in fief to the latter the
{_towers_} and houses of Carcassonne, on condition, says
Dom Vaissette, « to keep watch and guard the city,
some during four, the others during eight months
of the year and to reside there all the while with their
families and vassals. Those gentlemen, who called
themselves lords of Carcassonne, promised by an oath
to the viscount to keep the city faithfully. Bernard
Aton granted them sundry privileges and they engaged
in their turn to pay him homage and an oalh of
fidelity. That is what gave birth, it seems, to the
« mortes-payes » of the city of Carcassonne, who are
« bourgeois », who still have to keep the watch and
enjoy therefore sundry privileges.

It was probably under viscount Bernard Aton or,
at the latest, under Roger III, about 1138, that the
castle was reared and the Visigoth walls repaired. The
towers of the castle, by their construction and the few
--page 7
carvings which still decore the capitals of the small
columns serving as mullions to the twin windows,
certainly belong to the first half of the XIIth century.
By going over the inner wall of the city we can easily
mark out the parts of the buildings which date from
that time; their kerb-stones are made of yellowish
sandstone and set in layers of 0 m. 15 to 0 m. 25 in
height by 0 m. 20 to 0 m. 30 in width and very
roughly drafted.

On the first of August 1209 Carcassonne was besieged
by the army of the crusader commanded by the
famous Simon de Montfort.

Viscount Roger had had the defence-works of the
city reinforced as well as those of the two faubourgs
of Trivalle and Graveillant situated between the town
and the river Aude, also towards the road to Narbonne.

The defenders, after losing the faubourgs, lacking
water, were constrained to capitulate. The siege undertaken
by the army of the Crusaders lasted only from
the 10th to the 15th of August, the day of the surrender
of the town. It cannot be admitted that during
that short time the besiegers were able to execute the
mining or sapping works which ruined part of the
walls and towers of the Visigoths; the less so as there
are underpinnings made during the XIIth century, to
consolidate and raise the towers, which had been
greatly damaged through sap and mine.

It must then be admitted that the siege-works and
the breaks which are traced namely on the Northern
side, are due to the Moors of Spain when they conquered
that last bulwark of the Visigoth kings. Bernard Aton
cannot be, either, the author of those
mining-works, for the treaty which gave him back
--page 8
the city held by his rebellious subjects does not imply
that he had to lay a long siege or that the defenders
were reduced to the last extremity.

Viscount Bernard Aton, in defiance of the treaty
which surrendered the city of Carcassonne to the
Crusaders, had died imprisoned in one of the towers
in November 1209. Since then, Raymond de Trincavel,
his son, had been despoilt, in 1226, by Louis the VIIIth,
of all his lands, reconquered over the Crusaders. Carcassonne
was henceforth part of the royal domain and
a seneschal ruled it for the king of France.

In 1240, that young viscount Raymond de Toulouse,
the last of the viscounts of Béziers, who had been put
into the hands of the Count of Foix (he was then two
years old) turns up suddenly in the dioceses of Narbonne
and Carcassonne with a body of troops from
Catalonia and Aragon. He takes hold, without meeting
any serious resistance, of the castles of Montreal, of
the cities of Montolieu, Saissac, Limoux, Azillan, Laurens,
and presents himself before Carcassonne.

There exist two versions of the siege of Carcassonne
underkaten by young viscount Raymond in 1240,
written by eye-witnesses : that of Guillaume de Puy-Laurens,
inquisitor for the Faith in the region of
Toulouse, and that of seneschal Guillaume des Ormes,
who held the city for the king of France. The latter
version is an account, in the form of a diary, addressed
to Queen Blanche, the mother of Louis the IXth.

This important document explains to us all the dispositions
of attack and defence
	{^The account of seneschal Guillaume des Ormes and the story
	of Guillaume de Puy-Laurens have been published and annotated by
	M. Douët d'Areq, in the {_Biblioth. de l'Ecole des Chartes_}, 2e série,
	t. II, p. 363.^}
At the time of the
--page 9
siege the walls of Carcassonne had neither the dimensions
nor the strengh which were given them later
on by Louis IX and Philip the Bold. The remains, still
very obvious, of the wall of the Visigoths, repaired in
the XIIth century, and the searches undertaken recently
allow us to trace exactly the defence-works existing
at the time when Raymond de Toulouse undertook to
force them.

We give further on (fig. 2) the plan of those defence-works
with the adjoining faubourgs, the barbicans
and the course of the river Aude.

Trincavel's army invested the place on the 17th of
September 1240 and got hold of the faubourg of Graveillant
which was immediately retaken by the besieged. That faubourg,
says the account is {_ante portam
Tolosœ_}. Now the Toulouse-gate is no other than the
gate called « de l'{_Aude_} » nowadays, which is a Romaïc
construction bored into a Visigoth wall and the faubourg
of Graveillant consequently can only be the
faubourg called « de la {_Barbacane_} ». The sequel of
the story shows us that this first surmise is accurate.

The besiegers were coming from Limoux, that is to
say from the South; they had no need to cross the
Aude before Carcassonne to invest the place. A stone-bridge
existed over the Aude. That bridge still stands
entire to-day, it is the old bridge « {_le vieux pont_} », the
building of which dates partly from the XIIth century.
It was only repaired and supplied with a bridge-head
under Saint-Louis and Philip the Bold. It is under the
letter P on our fig. 2.

Raymond de Trincavel was aware that the besiegers
were expecting rescuers who could only rush
into the city by passing the river Aude since they had
to come from the North West. Therefore the viscount
--page 10
took hold of the bridge, and, pursuing his attack
along the right bank of the river up the stream, be
tried to cut off the besiegers from every communication
with the left bank.

Unable at first to maintain himself in the faubourg
of Graveillant (see fig. 2 : G), he takes hold of a fortified
mill (M), on a branch of the Aude, sends off his
troops in that direction, lodges them in the lower
parts of the faubourg, and manages his attack in the
following way : part of the besiegers commanded by
Ollivier de Thermes, Bernard Hugon de Serre-Longue
and Giraud d'Aniort, camp between the North-Western salient
of the city and the river, dig trenches and
surround themselves wdth palisaded intrenchments.

The other body, headed by Pierre de Fenouillet,
Renaud de Puy and Guillaume Fort, is lodged before
the barbican B and that of the gate called Narbonnaise (N).

In 1240, besides those two barbicans, there existed
another : D
	{^Reconstructed under Saint-Louis.^}
which led down from the castle into the
faubourg
	{^All the defence-works of the castle date from the XIIth century
	except those of the South front.^}
and yet another (H) facing the South.
The large barbican D also served to protect the Toulouse-gate
T (to-day « porte de l'Aude »).

It must be noticed that the only points on which
the outward ground is nearly on the same level as the
lists (for Guillaume des Ormes points out the existence
of the lists L and consequently of outward
walls), are the points O and R. As to the ground of
the barbican D in the castle, it was naturally on the
same level as the faubourg and consequently much
below the seat of the city. The whole western front
--page 11
{figure large "Figure 2." "figure2"}
--page 12
of the city is built on a very high and steep
escarpment.

On retaking at first the faubourg from the besiegers,
the defenders of the city had hastened to carry
into their walls a large quantity of wood which was
very helpful to them; but they had to give up the faubourg.

The viscount then attacked at the same time the
barbican D of the castle, to take from the besieged
every chance of acting again on the offensive, the barbican
B (it was, besides, a projection) the barbican N
of the « Porte Narbonnaise » and the projection I on
the level of the tableland which extended to a hundred
metres on that side to the South-West.

The besiegers, camped between the city and the
river were in a pretty bad position; they entrenched
themselves therefore with great care and covered
their fronts with such a great number of crossbowmen
that no one could leave the town without
getting wounded.

They soon reared a mangone before the barbican D.

The besieged, on their side, within the walls of
that barbican, rear a Turkish « pierrière »
	{^A machine to fling stones.^}
which
batters the mangonel. To be as well defiladed as possible,
the mangonel must have been set under the
letter E.

Soon after, the besiegers began to undermine the
barbican of the « porte Narbonnaise » (N) making
their galleries start from the houses of the faubourg
which on that side, nearly touched the defence-works.

The mines are propped up and shored with wood to
which they set fire thus causing to fall part of the
defence-works of the barbican.

--page 13
But the besieged have counter-mined in order to
stop the progress of the enemy miners and have
repaired the part of the barbican still standing.
It is by mining-work that, on the two chief points of
the attack, the men of the Viscount attempt to take
the place. Those mines are pushed on with great activity;
they are no sooner discovered than other galleries are begun.

The besiegers do not content themselves with those
two attacks. While they batter the barbican D of the
castle and ruin the barbican N of the Porte Narbonnaise,
they endeavour to damage a part of the lists
and engage in a very serious attack on the projection
1 between the bishop's palace and the cathedral of
St Nazaire, marked S on our plan.

As we have already said, the table-land, on that
point, extended almost on a level with the inside of
the city from I to O, and that is why Saint Louis and
Philip the Bold reared, on that table-land, outside the
old Visigoth walls, considerable works, destined to
command the escarpment.

The attack of Trincavel's troops is very sharply
pursued on that side (a weak point then); the mines
reach the foundations of the Visigoths walls, the
shores are set on fire and ten fathoms of curtains
crumble down. But the besieged have fortified themselves
behind the breach with good palisades and
« Bretèches »
	{^A small blockhouse made of timber.^}
so that the enemy troops dare not
venture on an attack. Moreover mining-galleries are
also opened before the Rodez-gate (B); the besiegers
counter-mine and drive back the workmen of the
besiegers.

Meanwhile, breaches had been opened on various
--page 14
points and Viscount Raymond, fearing to see at any
moment the rescuers sent from the North turn up,
decides to attempt a general attack. His men are
driven back with considerable losses, and, four days
later, hearing of the arrival of the royal army, he
raises the siege after setting fire to the churches of
the faubourg and among others, the church of the
Minimes (R).

Trincavel's army had remained twenty-four days
before the town.

Louis IX, laying great store by the place of Carcassonne,
which covered that part of the royal domain
before Aragon, and wishing to have to dread no longer
the consequences of a siege which would have put
it into the hands of an enemy always on the watch,
decided to make it an impregnable fortress.

We must add to the story of Seneschal Guillaume
des Ormes a fact related by Guillaume de Puy-Laurens.
In the night of the 8th to the 9th of September,
the inhabitants of the faubourg of Carcassonne (Trivalle:
see the plan fig. 2), in spite of their vow of fidelity
to the noblemen who held for the king, had opened their
gates to Trincavel's soldiers who, since then, directed
from that faubourg an attack on the left, against the
Porte Narbonnaise. Saint Louis, directly after the
siege, was raised, had no need to destroy the « bourg »
already burnt by Viscount Raymond, but, wishing on
one hand to punish the inhabitants for their breach of
faith, on the other to have to dread no longer a neighbourhood
too dangerous for the city, he forbade the
citizens of the faubourg of Graveillant to re-build
their houses and had the faubourg of « la Trivalle »
evacuated. Those unfortunate people had to go into
exile.

--page 15
Louis IX began immediately important works of
defence round the city; he had the remains of the faubourgs
razed, cleared the ground between the city
and the bridge and reared all the outward walls which
we see today, so as to cover himself on all sides and
take time to improve the inward works. Enabled to
notice the weakness of the two parts of the walls
against which Viscount Raymond had rightly aimed
his two chief attacks, that is to say the south extremity
and the Porte Narbonnaise, he extended the
outward walls far beyond the old south salient on the
table-land which commands, on that side, a ravine
opening into the Aude, about 30 metres to the outside,
thus locking in the new-works the two chief points of
Trincavel's attack (fig. 16).

Bent on making the city Carcassonne the bulwark
of that part of the royal domain against all attacks
from the heretic lords of the south provinces, saint
Louis would not permit the inhabitants of the old
faubourgs to re-build their dwellings in the neighbourhood
of the city. At the prayer of Bishop Radulphe
	{^The tomb of that bishop is in the small chapel built at the
	extremity of the south arm of the cross of the church of Saint-Nazaire.^}
after seven years of exile, he consented
only to allow those unfortunate refugees to settle on
the other bank of the river Aude. Here are saint
Louis's letters patent sent on that score:
	{^{_Hist. des Antiq. et comtes de Carcassonne_}. G. Besse, citizen of
	Carcassonne, Béziers, 1645. « Those letters, says Besse, were executed
	by the seneschal, {_pridie nonas Aprilis_}, that is to say on the 4th of
	April 1247 and. with the records of their execution, happen to have
	been transcribed in the language of the country, in the manuscript-book
	of the customs of Carcassonne. »^}

« Louis, by the grace of God, King of France, to
our friend and liege Jean de Gravis, seneschal of
--page 16
Carcassonne, greeting and love. We demand that you
receive in safety the men of Carcassonne who had fled
therefrom, because they had not paid to us the sums
which they owed, after the payment of the said sums
was due. As to the dwellings and habitations that they
claim, you shall take advice and counsel of our friend
and liege, the bishop of Carcassonne and of Raymond
de Capendu and other good men, to grant them a place
to inhabit provited no harm can come of it to our
castle and city of Carcassonne. We wish you to give
them back the property, inheritance and possessions
which they enjoyed before the war and to let them
enjoy their uses and customs so that we or our successors
cannot change them. We mean, however that
the said men of Carcassonne must re-make and build
at their cost the churches of Notre-Dame and the
Frères-Mineurs, which they had demolished; and, on
the contrary, we mean that you shall in no wise
receive any of those who introduced the Viscount (of
Trincavel) into the « bourg » of Carcassonne, such
being traitors. Therefore you shall recall the others
who are not guilty. And you shall tell from us our
friend and liege the bishop of Carcassonne, that he
must renounce the fines which he claims from the
fugitives, and of that we shall be grateful to him.
Given at Helvenas, the Monday after St Peter's See (la
chaise de Saint Pierre). »

Although we do not possess the original text of that
piece, but only the transcription of it obviously altered
by Besse, that document is no less very important
in that it gives us the date of the foundation of the
present city of Carcassonne. Indeed, in execution of
those letters patent, the place to build the new bourg
was laid out beyond the river Aude, and as that place
--page 17
belonged to the bishopric the king indemnified the
bishop by giving him a half of the town of Villalier.
The records of that exchange were noted down at
Aigues-Mortes with the seneschal in August 1248.

That bourg is nowadays the city of Carcassonne,
built at one cast, on a regular plan, with streets in
straight rows, intersecting one another at right angle,
a square in the centre and two churches.

The prudence of Louis IX did not confine itself to
clearing the outskirts of the city and to rearing new
outward walls; he built the big circular works called
« the Barbican » instead of the one which commanded
the faubourg of Graveillant. That faubourg, rebuilt
later on, took its name from those works.

He made that barbican communicate with the
castle, by fortified inclined planes, very cleverly
conceived in order to defend the place. From the manner
in which the works of the outward walls are made
we have reason to think that the building was pushed
on actively in order to guard the city from a sudden
attack, and to find time to repair and enlarge the
outward walls.

Philip the Bold when at war with the king of Aragon
continued those works with great activity. They
were finished at the time of his death (1285). Carcassonne
was the centre of the operations undertaken
against the army of Aragon, and a safe shelter in case
of failure.

In the place of the old gate called « Pressam » or
« Narbonnaise », or « des Salins » Philip the Bold built
admirable defence works including the present « Porte
Narbonnaise », the « Trésau » tower, and the fine
neighbouring curtains. On the west-south-west side,
on one of the points most sharply attacked by Trincavel's
--page 18
army, taking advantage of the salient which
St-Louis had had made, he rebuilt all the inward
works, that is to say, the towers n°ˢ 39, 11, 40, 41, 42,
43 (Gate of « Razez, St-Nazaire, or des Lices »), as
Well as the high intermediate curtains (fig. 16), so as
to command better the valley of the river Aude and
the extremity of the tableland. A curious fact ascribes
a definite date to the part of the walls which surrounded
the bishop's palace. In August 1280, at Paris,
king Philip allowed Isard, then bishop of Carcassonne,
to open out four grated windows in the curtain
leaning against the palace, after taking the seneschal's
advice and under the express condition that
those windows should be walled up in case of war,
reserving to open them again at the end of the war.
The king bound himself to make, at his cost, the
sewers for the drainage of the waters of the palace,
through the wall, and the bishop was to keep possession
of the stories of the tower called the Bishop's
tower (a square tower n° 11 bestriding the two walls),
up to the loop-holing, without prejudice to the other
rights of the bishop over the rest of the city-walls.
Now, those four windows have not been opened afterwards,
they were built on rearing the curtain, and
still exist between the towers n° 39, 11 and 40; consequently
those curtains and towers date from 1280.
On the south and south east sides, Philip the Bold
had the Visigoth towers capped, raised and even
re-built on some points, as well as the old curtains. On
the north side the damaged parts of the old towers
were repaired and a large barbican reared before the
entrance of the castle inside the city.

The outward walls, which I consider as a few years
older than the reparations undertaken by Philip the
--page 19
Bold, to improve the inward walls, — and I am going
to give certain proofs thereof, — are built of irregular
materials (sandstone) roughly disposed, but presenting
level kerb-stones, whereas all the constructions
of the end of the XIIIth century have kerb-stones
chiselled on the arris and form a sort of rustic bosses
which impart to those constructions a robust and
very effective look. All the profiles of the towers of
the inner wall, repaired by Philip the Bold are exactly
alike; the pendants of the arches of the vaults and
the few rare sculptures such, for instance, as the
statue of the Virgin and the niche placed above the
« Porte Narbonnaise », undeniably belong to the end
of the XIIIth century.

In those constructions the materials are of the
same nature, coming from the same quarries and the
mode of draught being uniform; everywhere we come
across those bosses, as well in the entirely new parts,
like those of the west, the south-west and the east, as
in the portions which have been completed or restored
on the Visigoth constructions and on those of the
XIIIth century. The mouldings are finely carved and
already meagre whereas the outer walls offers in its
loopholes, its gates and its corbels very simple and
broad outlines. The key-stones of the tower n° 18
(tower called de la Vade ou du Papegay) are decorated
with sculptured figures presenting all the characteristics
of the imagery of St-Louis's time. Moreover,
between the tower n° 7 and the western watch-tower,
the parapet of the curtain has been raised, leaving
however the primitive merlons which are thus included
in the higher masonry, so as to give to that curtain
considered to be too low a wider outlook.

Now that superadded masonry is built in stones
--page 20
with bosses, the battlements are more distant from
each other, the draught much more careful than in
the lower part and in everything absolutely like the
draught of the 1280 structures. The difference
between the two structures can be noticed by the most
unpractised observer: Therefore the lower part being
as to the mode of construction like all the rest of the
outer wall and the higher part similar in draught
to all the structures due to Philip the Bold, the outer
wall has evidently been erected before the restorations
and adjunctions undertaken by Louis the ninth's
son.

On the south-west side, the wall of the Visigoths
ran along the western front of the cathedral of St-Nazaire
(fig. 16) that front, raised as we said at the
end of the XIth century or at the beginning of the
XIIth, is only a very thick wall without any opening
in the lower part. It commanded the Visigoth wall
and increased in strength on that vulnerable point,
its coping consisted in battlements of which we have
found the traces and which we have been able to
reconstitue entirely. The fortifications of Philip the
Bold allowed between themselves and that front
(fig. 16) a very wide space and the upper defence-works
of the « St-Nazaire » front remained purposeless
since they in longer commanded the outworks.
Since then no work of defence was undertaken in the
city of Carcassonne and, throughout all the middle
ages, that fortress was considered as impregnable;
the fact is, it was never attacked and only opened its
gates to the Black Prince Edward in 1355 when the
whole region of « Languedoc » had submitted to
that conqueror.


--page 21
{section "DESCRIPTION OF THE DEFENCE-WORKS OF THE CITY"}

I tried to give a very brief account of the history
of the strutures which compose the wails of the city
of Carcassonne, so as to explain to interested travellers
the irregularities and differences in aspect shown
by those works, which date in part from the Roman
and Visigoth rule and which have been successively
modified and restored, during the XIIth and XIIIth
centuries by the viscounts and by the king of France.

When we come to the city of Carcassonne, we are
struck at once by the grand and severe aspect of
those brown towers so varied in dimensions and shape
and which follow, as well as the high curtains which
join them, the undulations of the ground so as to
obtain an outlook on the country and utilize as much
as possible the natural advantages offered by the
steeps of the tableland along which they have been
reared. On the eastern side opens out the chief
entrance, the only one accessible to carting : it is the
« Porte Narbonnaise » defended by a ditch and a
barbican supplied with loop-holes and battlements
with a watch. The entrance is slant, so as to mask
the gate of the chief work. The castle which can be
isolated from the barbican, preceeds it, astride on the
bridge which was composed of two sliding platforms
the spindles of which are still in their places. That
--page 22
barbican and the castle are opened at the gorge, so as
to be battered by the upper work of the « Porte
Narbonnaise » if those first structures fell into the
enemy's power.

On the outward side the two huge towers, between
which the gate opens, are reinforced by « becs », a
sort of buttress meant to keep off the besieger from
the tangent point the most assailable, to force him to
unmask himself, to turn aside the battering ram
(« bosson » in the oïl dialect) or to oppose a thicker
masonry to the mine.

The entrance was closed, firstly by a chain, the
fastenings of which are still in their places and which
was meant to prevent the horses from rushing into
the city. A machicoulis protects the first portcullis
and the first wooden-gate with bars; in the vault
opens a second machicoulis and a third is found
before the second portcullis. It was not easy then to
overcome all those obstacles but that entrance was
defended in a still more effectual way in war-time.

Over the arch of the gate, on the two sides of the
niche occupied by the statue of the Virgin, can be
seen, on the flanks of the two towers, three neatly
made notches; the two nearer the angle are cut
square and 0 m. 20 in depth, the third is believed,
as if to hold the foot of a wooden rafter or of a
slanting joist. Above the niche of the Virgin, we
notice three other deep square holes meant to hold
wooden pieces forming a strong jut. Those holes
held indeed the wooden pieces of a penthouse
forming a marked jut over the gate thus protecting
the niche and the guardsmen at the entrance of the
city.

That penthouse subsisted in peace-time; in wartime
--page 23
it served as machieoulis. At 1 m. 30 above the
roofing of that penthouse can still be seen, on the
flanks of the two towers, on each side, four notches or
square holes, on the same level, the three first serving
as props to the joists of the penthouse, and the fourth
at 0 m. 60 in front.

There was set the floor of the second machicoulis.
The fifth notch, cut between the two last and slightly
above them, served as guard to hold the sliding
madrier meant to protect the besieged against the
projectiles flung up from the outside, and maintained,
by a system of props, the whole of that upper
story, thus keeping it from tumbling down; it was
only possible to pass from the towers into those outer
machicoulis through an opening contrived in the
second story and by ladders, so as to isolate those
machicoulis in case the besiegers should take hold of
them. Those wooden works were protected by mantlets
pierced with loopholes. The besieger, to be able
to approach the first portcullis, was thus forced to face
a shower of arrows and of projectiles flung from the
three machicoulis two of these being set in war-time
and the last being part of the very structure. Moreover
the top of the towers was set with timber covings
which were equally set in war-time.
	{^The reader remembers that Seneschal Guillaume des Ormes
	congratulates himself for having been able to retake the « faubourg
	de Graveillant » in which was found a provision of wood which
	proved useful to the besieged.^}
The holes
destined to the passage of the sliding joists which
supported those covings are all intact and disposed in
such a way that, from the inside, it was possible, in a
very short time, to set those wooden works, the covering
of which was connected with that of the permanent
--page 24
coping. Indeed, it is easy to conceive that, with
the system of battlements and of loopholes contrived
in the cope-stones, it was impossible to prevent assailers
numerous and bold, protected by shields and
even by « chats » (a sort of chariot covered up with
madders and skins) from sapping the foot of the
towers, since, from the loop-holes, in spite of the pronounced
sloping of their plan it is impossible to see
the foot of the towers or curtains and since, through
the battlements, unless a man threw half his body
out of their joist, it was not possible either to aim at
an object placed at the foot of the scarp.

It was then necessary to establish continous works,
covered, and allowing a great number of defenders to
batter the foot of the towers by flinging stones or
projectiles of every description.

The plan (fig. 3), which we give here, made on
the axle of the « Porte Narbonnaise », sets forth the
dispositions which we have just sketched.

Not only did the covings fulfil that purpose, but
they allowed the defenders full freedom in their
movements the watchers inside the battlements being
kept for gathering projectiles and circulating.

Moreover, if those covings were pierced with loop-holes,
besides the continuous machicoulis, the loop-holes
contrived in the stone-merlons remained
unmasked in their lower part and allowed the crossbowmen,
posted inside the parapet on that watch, to
fling arrows at the assailers. The defence was thus as
active as possible and a lack of projectiles alone
would leave some respite to an attack.

We must not wonder, then, if, during some memorable
sieges, after a protacted defence, the besieged
were reduced to uncovering their houses, pulling
--page 25
{figure large "Figure 3" "figure3"}
--page 26
down the garden-fences and unpaving the streets to
supply the covngs with projectiles and force the
assailers to recede from the foot of the towers and
walls.

On the other hand, the besiegers tried to set fire to
those wooden covings, which made the work of the
sappers impossible or to break them by means of
stones flung by the mangonels or the trebuchets, and
it must not have been very difficult, especially when
the walls were not very high. Therefore, as early as
the end of the XIIIth century, they began to supply the
walls and towers with stone-machicoulis resting on
consoles such as can be seen at Beaucaire, Avignon
and in all the castles or walls of the XlVth or XVth
centuries.
	{^In the castle of Coucy, reared in the beginning of the XIIIth
	century, the stone-machicoulis already begins to replace the wooden
	covings. There we see already large stone-consoles support the wooden-coving.^}

At Carcassonne, the stone-machicoulis appears
nowhere and everywhere, on the contrary, are found
the holes of the wooden-covings, in the fortifications
of the castle which date from the beginning of the
XIIth century, as well as in the works of Louis the
IXth and Philip the Bold.

In the XIIIth century, the Black mountain and the
slopes of the Pyrenees were covered with forests; it
was then easy to use largely those materials so common
at the time in the region of Carcassonne.

The coping of the two walls of the city, curtains,
and towers, are all pierced with those square holes
crossing at equal distances the foot of the parapets
on the level of the watches. The upper stories of the
towers and large sheds built inside the curtains, as
--page 27
{figure large "Figure 4." "figure4"}
--page 28
we shall explain presently, served to hold those provisions
of wood which were always to be ready to set
the town into a state of defence.

At ordinary times, the stone-coping could suffice
and we still see how, in the upper stories of the
towers, the battlements were supplied with shutters
with cylinders : sorts of ports moving on a wooden
axle set on two iron hooks; shutters which allowed
the besieged to see the foot of the walls without
unmasking themselves, and which sheltered the posts
of the upper stories from wind and rain. The lower
shutters were easily taken off when they set the
covings, for, then, the battlements served as communication
between those covings and the watches or
the inside floors.

Our figure 4 explains the disposition of those shutters,
the upper part turning upon two fixed hinges
remained, the lower part being taken off when they
set the covings.

But let us revert to the « Porte Narbonnaise ».
Besides, the chain (A) (Fig. 3) behind the first semi-circular
arch of the entrance, and between that arch
and the second, opens a machicoulis (B), through
which they flung the projectiles right and left at the
assailers who attempted to brake the first portcullis
(C). The reducts which held the defenders are defiladed
by a thick parapet of stones, the working of the
portcullises is perfectly comprehensible still to-day.
In the wall which is above the entrance we notice in
the two first two pilasters of the groove of that first
portcullis the slanting notches which held the two
stanchions of the windlass sketched on our plan, and
the fastenings of the iron-links which maintained the
tops of those stanchions; on the level of the ground
--page 29
the two holes destined to hold the wedges on which
rested the portcullis when lifted; under the arch, at
the top of the tympanus, the deep hole which held
the suspension of the pulleys destined to the play of
the counterpoises and of the chain wound round the
windlass.

Behind the portcullis, there was a thick gate with
two leaves (D) moving upon lower toadstones and
pivots fixed in a wooden lintel, the fastenings of
which are intact. Those leaves were strongly joined by
a bar which jointed into the notch ready in the facing
of the wall, on the right, when the gate was open, and
by two other wooden bars fitting into some notches
contrived in the two walls of the lobby.

If we get into the middle of the passage we see
open in the vault a large square hole (E) which communicates
with the hall of the first story. The extent
of that hole is due to the necessity in which the
besieged found themselves to fling projectiles not
only in the middle, but also along the walls of the
passage. The vault of the first story is equally pierced
with a square hole (1) but smaller, so that from the
second story it was possible to crush down the assailers,
in case they should have taken hold of the lower
hall, and also to give orders to the men who occupied
it.

On the two sides of that large machicoulis, in the
first story, there exist two deep reducts which could
serve as refuge and defilade the defenders in case the
assailers, masters of the passage, should have flung
up arrows at them. Further, the width of that machicoulis
made it possible to fling at the assailer burning
fagots and the reducts thus sheltered the defender
against flame and smoke while leaving them the
--page 30
means of feeding the fire. Lateral loop-holes, pierced
in the passage on the level of the ground (E), allowed
the cross-bowmen, posted in the ground-floor halls of
the two towers, to fling tiles point blank at the men
who might dare to venture between the two porlecullises.

As well as before the outward portcullis (C) there
exist in the hall of the first story a second oblong
machicoulis (F) destined to protect the second
portcullis (J). This machicoulis was closed, as well
as the opening contrived in the vault of the passage,
by a trap-door, the grooves of which, cut in the wall,
still exist. By means of a small window which lighted
the hall of the first story, the besieged, from inside,
could communicate orders to those who held the
portcullis on the watch contrived over the second
gate (H). That second portcullis worked under an
arch reserved to that effect; its wind-glass was
moreover protected by a penthouse (P) maintained by
strong iron-hooks which are still sealed in the wall.
The whole play of that portcullis is still visible; its
iron work is still in its place, the portcullis alone is
lacking.

The two towers which flank that entrance are laid
out in the same way. They include : A story of cellars
dug under the ground. The ground-floor pierced with
loop-holes and vaulted with four staircases to communicate
with the first floor; the first floor equally
vaulted, pierced with loop-holes and provided with
two chimneys and two kilns. Two of the staircases
only go up to the upper floor, the two others do not
reach there and can thus mislead people who should
not know the precints. A second story was formely
covered by a floor leaning on the border of the watch;
--page 31
that second story is pierced, on the side of the city,
with rich gothic windows with mullions (O) which
opened only in the lower part of the shutters, whereas
the panels of the windows were glazed up; those
windows were strongly grated outside. A third
embattled story held the timber of the covering; that
timber divides into three pavilions, two over the two
towers and one intermediate pavilion above the gate.
At the time of the first construction, reconstituted
nowadays, those three pavilions at the point of their
intersection, were supported by rafters fitting into
notches contrived in the layer of the cornice; whether
those rafters gave way, or whether the waters of the
badly kept gutters made them rot, in the XVth
century, that covering was repaired and, to support
it, they reared two large arches which fitted very badly
with the structure of the XIIIth century, since one of
them tumbled into one of the battlements and closed
it up. The stone gutters were set on those arches and
held the feet of the coping of the roofs at the points
of their junction. Projecting gurgoyles threw out the
waters of the gutters on the country-side. Those
arches which drove out the large wall erected on the
side of the city had to be taken off.

The watch of the curtain is not broken off by the
« Porte Narbonnaise » according to the ordinary
system adopted in the defence-works of that period.
It passes, on the side of the city, over the gates, and
connects the two curtains in such a way, however,
that it communicates with the city only by the inside
staircases of the towers and by a single bay formerly
closed by two thick iron-bound leaves. The present
staircase which gives access to that watch is modern,
and has been built by military engineers.

--page 32
Usually the towers of the inward wall, and even
of the outward wall, break off the watches; so that,
if the assailer should succeed in getting hold of the
curtain, he would be caught between two towers and,
unless forcing the ones after the others, it became
impossible for him to go freely around the ramparts;
the more so as the staircases, which set the watches
in direct communication with the terre-plein on the
city-side, are very few, and it is only possible to go
up to those watches by ascending the staircases contrived
in the towers. Thus each tower was a separate
reduct independent and to be forced. The gates which
made the towers communicate with the watches are
narrow, strongly iron-bound, barred inside, so that in
a moment it was possible to close the leaf and barricade
it by drawing swiftly the wooden bar set in the
wall before even taking time to push the bolts and
turn the key. Careful examination of those works
brings out the precautions taken by the engineers of
the tower against surprises. All sorts of measures
have been taken to stop the enemy and worry him
at every step by unexpected contrivances. Evidently,
a siege at that time became serious for the besieged,
as well as for the assailer, only when they had come
to fight, so to speak, hand to hand. A warlike garrison
could struggle with good chances even in their last
defence works. The enemy entered the city by scaling
the wall or through a breach, without forcing the
garrison to surrender, for, then, the besieged, shut
up in the towers, which are, I repeat, so many independent
reducts, could still defend themselves; barricaded
gates had to be forced. Should the groundfloor
of a tower be taken, the upper stories kept the means
of taking the offensive again and crushing the enemy.
--page 33
We see that every thing was calculated for a possible
foot by foot struggle. The spiral staircases were
easily barricaded, so as to render futile the efforts of
the besieger to reach the upper stories.

Should the « bourgeois » of the city wish to surrender,
the garrison defended themselves against them
and forbade them access to towers and curtains. It
was a system of defiance driven to the extreme.

The flinging-machines, the engines which the assailers
had at their disposal, then, to batter from the
outside walls like those of the city of Carcassonne,
could produce only a very small effect, owing to the
strength of those works and the thickness of the
merlons; for the firing artillery alone could damage
them. There were left the sap, the mine, the battering-ram
and all the engines which forced the assailer to
go up to the very foot of the defence-works.

Now, it was difficult to stand and sap under those
powerful covings which hurled projectiles. The mine
was not much good here for all the walls and towers
were set on the rock.

We must not be surprised if, in those distant times,
certain sieges lasted indefinitely. The city of Carcassonne
was, at the end of the XIIIth century, with its
double walls and ingenious contrivances of the defence,
an impregnable place which could only be
reduced by famine and, even then, to invest it, a
numerous army would have been needed, for it was
easy for the garrison to keep the banks of the Aude
by means of a large barbican (N° 8 of the plan fig. 16)
which allowed the besieged to sally forth in imposing
numbers and hurl back the besiegers into the river.
On examining the general plan we see at the foot
of the escarpment of the city, before the towers
--page 34
11 and 12 in the west, a wall which defended the
« faubourg de la Barbacane ». That wall dates from
the XIIIth century, and it was certainly reared to
prevent the enemy from posting themselves, as Trincavel
had done, between the river Aude and the city.
That wall is within crossbow range of the towers 11,
12 and 40 and is commanded by these. It was therefore
very difficult to reach the barbican by going
down the right bank of the Aude in spite of the garrison
of the city.

The ramparts and towers present a formidable look
especially on the points of the walls which are comparatively
easily approched, wherever natural escarpments
do not oppose a powerful obstacle to the
assailer. On the north-east east and south sides,
where the table-land on which the city is set is about
on the same level as the country, large ditches protect
the first walls. It is probable that the extremities
of those ditches as well as the outposts of the gates,
were defended by outward blockades according to the
custom of the time. Those blockades were provided
with opening fences.

On advancing in the lists, between the two walls,
the first tower we see on the right after the « Porte
Narbonnaise » is the tower n° 21 called « du Treshaut »,
or « du Trésau », « de Tressan », « du Trésor »
or « de la Cendrino » . That structure is a magnificent
work of the end of the XIIIth century, contemporary
of the « Porte Narbonnaise ». It commands the whole
country the town, and, reaching almost to the outward
walls, it commanded the table-land, the barbican
of the « Porte Narbonnaise » and prevented the
enemy to spread on the northside in the lists along
which stand the Visigoth towers.

--page 35
The tower « du Treshaut », besides it's cellars, includes
four stories, two of which are vaulted.

The lower story is dug underneath the « terre-plein »
of the town. The second story is almost on the
same level as the inward ground of the town. The
third story was covered with a floor and the fourth,
under covering, on the level of the battlement-watch.

The watch of the curtains passes behind the gable
of the tower, but has no communication with the
inward halls.

On the town side, the upper part of the tower ends
in an embattled gable with rampant staircases along
the covering. Two square towers, provided with staircases
and embattled in their lower part, support the
gable and served as watch-towers, for they are, on
that side, the highest point of the works.

In peace-time, the battlements of the « Tour du
Treshaut » were not covered. The covering rests on
an inward wall. The gurgoyles which still exist inside
show in a certain way that the upper watch was under
open sky. In war-time the roofing of the covings
covered those watches as well as the covings themselves.

A single spiral staircase does duty for the first
stories, and all the issues were provided with strongly
iron-bound gates. The second story over the cellars
contains a small room, or reduct lighted by a window
destined to the captain, a large chimney, and
water-closets; that story and the ground-floor are
pierced with numerous loop-holes opening under big
arches provided with stone benches. The loop-holes
are not pierced one above the other but overlap,
« vides sur pleins » so as to batter all the points of
the circumference of the tower. That principle is
--page 36
generally followed in the towers of the inwards vails
and without exception in the towers of the outward
wall, where the loop-holes play an important part.
Indeed, the loop-holes pierced in the stories of the
towers could serve only when the enemy were still
far from the ramparts; we understand, then, why
they have been contrived in greater number and disposed
with more method in the towers of the outward
walls.

The curtains which belong to the « tour du Treshaut »
are very fine. Their lower part is pierced with
loop-holes on level with the « terre-plein » of the
town under semi-circular arches with stone-benches,
and their merlons, wide and thick, are well built.

The inward facing of the merlons between the
« tour Narbonnaise » and the « tour du Treshaut » is
not vertical, but sloping. The disposition of the
covings explains the use of that inclination of the
inward facing of the merlons.

On that point of the defence-work — one of the most
assailable, on accrount of the table-land which extends
on a level before the « Porte Narbonnaise » — the
inward curtains must have been provided with those
double covings which are sometimes mentioned in the
chronicles of the XIIIth century.
	{^At Toulouse, besieged by Simon de Montfort, the inhabitants
	strengthen incessantly the defences of the city :
	
	« E parec ben a lobra e als autres mestiers {/}
	« Que de dins et defora ac aitans del obriers {/}
	« Que garniron la vila els portals els terriers, {/}
	« Els murs et las bertrescas els cadafalcs dobliers {/}
	« Els fossatz e las lissas els pons els escaliers {/}
	« E lains en Toloza ac aitans carpentiers. »
	
	Those « cadafalcs dobliers » are double covings. See « Poème de
	la Croisade contre les Albigeois », Collection of the unpublished documents
	of the history of France.^}

--page 37
{figure large "Figure 5." "figure5"}

--page 38
The figure 5 explains in the present case the disposition
of those double covings. As we have just said,
the merlons having their inward facing sloping on the
watch (A) their base is pierced on the level of that
watch with coving holes 1 m. 30 in length at regular
distances. On the facing of the watch, on the townside,
is a continuous set-back (B). The double covings,
then, were disposed thus : every five feet passed
through the coving-holes strong rafters (C), on the
extremity of which, on the outside, stood the sloping
post (D) with counter-posts (E) forming the groove
for the passage of the madriers. Double braces (J)
pinched that post (D), rested upon the joist (F), bit
into the three posts (G, H, I), G being supported by
the sloping facing of the merlon, and caught the hind
post (K), equally inclined. A second row of braces (L)
at 1 m. 80 from the first row, made drag of the
cross-bowmen (M) of the coving. A machicoulis (N)
was reserved along the outward facing of the curtain.
That machicoulis was served by men posted (O) on
the watch, on the right of each battlement provided
with a joist (P). The archers and cross-bowmen of
the lower coving were posted on the point (R) and
were not needed to serve that first machicoulis.

The second coving possessed a machicoulis (S.).
The stores of projectiles were got inside the town by
the windlasses (T). Staircases (Q), disposed from
place to place, made the two covings communicate.
In this way it was possible to gather a considerable
quantity of stones on the point (V), without hindering
the circulation on the watches, nor the cross-bowmen
at their posts. On the point (X), we see, in front, at
the outside, the timber of the coving devoid of its
madriers and, (on Y), that same timber provided with
--page 39
these. Through the loop-holes and machicoulis, it was
thus possihle to fling at the assailer a prodigious
number of projectiles. As usual, the loop-holes U,
pierced in the merlons, cleared the space under the
covings and allowed a second row of cross-bowmen
posted between the trusses, on the watch, to aim at
the enemy.

We see that the inclination of the madriers was
very favourable to the shooting. It permitted, moreover,
to make the second machicoulis S slope outside
the lower coving.

The expense necessitated by such considerable
timber allowed only to set them under exceptional
circumstances, on the points badly defended by nature.

The curtain which connects the « tour du Trésau »
with the « porte Narbonnaise » possesses a small well
and a flanking watch-tower destined to batter the
interval between the barbican and that gate.

From the « tour du Trésau », on going northward,
we walk along a large part of the Visigoth walls.
Seeing the disorder of those old constructions, we
must admit that they have been upset by a terrible
siege; it is difficult to conceive how they managed, with
the means they had at their disposal then, to pull
down enormously thick bits of wall, bend those
towers, the lower part of which offers one mass of
masonry. It would seem that gun-powder alone could
work such havock, and yet the siege, during which a
considerable part of those ramparts has been pulled
down, is previous to the XIIth century, since, on
those ruins, we see arise constructions exactly like
those of the castle, dating from the XIIIth century.

Scarcely did they trouble to clear the remains, for
--page 40
we notice, locked in the curtains taken up in the
XIIIth century, enormous pieces of wall thrown down
and offering vertically the rows of their layers in
rough stone or brick. Thanks to the sound quality of
the mortars, those masses thrown down have not
fallen to pieces and stand there like rocks upon
which new walls might have been reared.

On that side, the curtains and towers are very high
and largely dominate the outward walls erected on
the crest of the escarpment.

That escarpment faces the river Aude and extends
up to the tower n° 41 which terminates the west
salient of the city.

Two gates are pierced in the walls of the Visigoths :
one, small, dating from the primitive period, has been
walled up; it is set on the right of the tower n° 26;
the other, pierced in the XIIth century and repaired
in the XIIIth, stands between the towers 24 and 25. It
is the gate which Seneschal Guillaume des Ormes
calls « porte de Rodez ». It offers no special defence,
but must have been preceded by a structure with a
postern, protected by the barbican-tower n° 4; a tower
which has been, unfortunately, modified in its shape
by the military engineers so that, to-day, the « porte
de Rodez » opens out into the lists and has no more
communication with the outside.

If we pass on to the other side of the castle, to the
south-west, we come across the « porte de l'Aude »
(formerly « porte de Toulouse »).

This gate was pierced in the Visigoth wall during
the XIIth century. We see, still, outside, the semi-circular
arch which seems to belong to that time,
from its draught and the materials employed. On the
left of that gate existed, on a Visigoth bit of wall, a
--page 41
structure contemporary with the castle, that is to say
erected during the Xlth or XIIth century. The outward
wall of that construction is still pierced with
three little twin windows divided by small columns
in marble with sculpted capitals.

A long ramp reached up to the large barbican n° 8
and was battered by that barbican; it rises, following
a rather steep inclination, and, winding, leads up to
a first gate, a simple fence defended by battlements
and commanded by a big structure, built as a crossbar,
ending, at the level of the watches of the outward
walls, by a platform and some merlons. At its
base, that cross-bar is pierced with a gate which
opens out into the south-west lists.

It is necessary to ascend, inside the outward walls,
a rather steep slope battered by the work which
masks the « porte de l'Aude », pierced in the outward
wall. That slope is commanded by the « Tour de la
Justice » n° 37, and by a Visigoth tower, n° 38.
A winding is thus reached which compels the comer to
turn off suddenly to reach the gate. Although there
are, in front of that gate, neither ditch nor weigh-bridges,
it was not easy to reach it, in spite of the
people inside the town, for the space included between
the two walls forms a regular parade, a large castle,
commanded on every side, by formidable works.
Moreover, the lists, right and left, were closed in by
gates. It will be noticed that the upper gate is pierced
in an inward angle, which permitted to flank it very
powerfully, and, further, that its cast forms, in front,
a small castle which could be closed entirely in wartime,
and which, in peace-time, was preceded by a
small post, the trace of which we still perceive along
the curtain. From that structure the rounds could go
--page 42
down into the south-west lists, by opening a gate
pierced on the flank of the parapet, and by setting
sliding-boards on the corbels fitted into the big
counterforts further on. That means of going out or
coming in shows well enough that the works, in front
of the « porte de l'Aude », were completely closed in
war-time.

On going from the « porte de l'Aude » to the southwest
lists, we soon leave the last traces of the Visigoth
constructions and reach the salient reared by Philip
the Bold, outside the grounds of the bishop's palace
(fig. 16). Having passed the gate pierced in the
commanding cross-bar which we believe to be the gate
called « du Sénéchal », we see one of the Visigoth
towers, entire, then the tower 39, called « de l'Inquisition »
and in which we found a prison with a central
pillar provided with chains, then the square
tower n° 11, called « de l'Evêque ». That tower,
astride over the lists, commands the two walls and
could, on that front, cut off all communication
between the south and the north part of the lists.
Howewer, the two arches thrown across the passage,
were only defended by two inward machicoulis and by
another pierced in the middle of the vault. We find
no trace of hinges showing the presence of gate-leaves,
but only notches, which lead us to suppose that, in
war-time, wooden-fences closed up those openings and
intercepted all communications. That tower of which
the bishop had the enjoyment, except the upper watch
is very fine, admirably built, proudly set on two walls,
breaking the uniformity of these. Besides cutting off
the communication with the lists, it also interrupted
the upper watch of the curtains, for, to go from the
north curtain to the south curtain, it was necessary
--page 43
to go through that tower and force two gates. The
inward staircases are contrived so as to make access
to the battlements independent from access to the
two vaulted halls, of which the bishop had the
enjoyment.

The curtains which make part of the salient built
by Philip the Bold, are provided with fine loop-holes
pierced under arcades with benches; loop-holes which
batter the lists and the watches of the outward walls.
We see further, outside that part of the outward
walls, besides the tower n° 12, called « du Grand-Canisou »,
the apertures of the sewer which the king
had had built through the wall reared at his order,
to throw out the waters of the bishop's palace as was
said before.

As to the structures of the bishop's palace, they are
completely razed; such is not the case with the
cloister of the church of St-Nazaire, the foundations
of which have been found. Those foundations, and
a wall of that cloister preserved, with the pillars
engaged and the supporting arches of the vaults, are
in keeping with the sketches of the old plans of the
city, in which that cloister and its dependences are
indicated. That structure dates from saint Louis'
time. After the tower n° 11 stands the tower n° 40,
called « de Cahusac » which offers a curious disposition :
The watch winds around it ands is covered
with a portico; then you arrive at the corner tower
n° 41, called « Mipadre » or « de Prade ». It includes
two vaulted stories and two stories between floors, it
is provided with a chimney and a kiln. The only gate
giving entrance into that tower, which does not break
off the watch, is pierced on the east-side, and was
locked by bolts and by a bar fitting into the wall. Just
--page 44
as is the other towers of that part of the walls, the
last merlon of the curtains rises at the point of junction
with the tower, where the gates are pierced, and
the last battlement was equally provided with shutters
on rollers, so as to protect those coming in and going
out or the watchmen posted at the entrance of the
towers. There are nearly always a few steps to be
ascended to pass from the curtains into the towers,
and then the battlements follow the slope.

It will be observed that the watches of the curtains,
and consequently the battlements and the covings are
not always on a level, but follow the slope of the
outward ground so as to keep on all the points of the
walls a uniform height in the escarpment, as is still
done nowadays.

It was a rule established by experience, and, beyond
a certain level, the scaling must be considered as
impossible; therefore they maintained everywhere a
minimum of elevation. However the escarpments of
the inward walls are much higher than those of the
outward walls. The outward walls were set so as to
batter the assailer at great distance and prevent him
from approaching; while, for the inward walls, everything
is combined to fight a foe quite near. It is no
use insisting on a disposition suggested by simple
common sense.

Within the cloister St-Nazaire, large staircases give
access to the ramparts. But it is good to observe that
the cloister and the bishop's palace were already
enclosed within walls and that, in consequence, the
inhabitants of the town could not ascend from the
public way to the curtains. Wherever there exist
staircases ascending directly to the watches, those
staircases are always either locked in old buildings
--page 45
dependent on the walls and fortified, or included
within special walls; such are the staircases which
went up to the curtain besides the tower n° 44, along
the tower n° 47 and near the chapel Saint-Sernin
(tower 53). Usually, it is the tower-staircases which,
by means of small strongly iron-bound gates, give
access to the watches. The garrison could, then, if they
liked, as we said before, isolate themselves and keep
the citizens in awe while they drove back the assailers.
They alone went round the two walls; between the
lists, while locking the gates of the town to the inhabitants;
on that point there was no disadvantage to the
watches being on a level with the « terre-plein ».

Following the inward walls towards the cast, after
passing the tower n° 42 — called « tour du Moulin »
because its upper story, in set back on the battlements,
used to be affected to the mechanism of a windmill —
you arrive at the tower n° 43, called « tour et posterne
Saint-Nazaire ». That structure, on a square plane, is
still one of the most remarkable of the city. Besides
the barbican n° 15, called « de la Crémade » and
dependent on the outward walls, is a low and narrow
postern, opening into the ditch which is shallow on
that point. That postern, in case of a siege, could be
easily walled up, since it was sufficient to stop the
steep staircase which, from the threshold of that postern,
ascends to the lists. The large diameter of the
« tour de 1a Crémade » makes it a barbican fitted,
besides, to protect men going out or coming in. That
tower was not covered, like the others, by a coving, and
communicates directly with the watch of the curtains,
of which it is only, so to say, a flanking appendage.

As to the « tour Saint-Nazaire », it was impossible
for besiegers, posted outside the outward walls, to
--page 46
suppose that it was provided with a postern. The gate
pierced at the foot that tower « Saint-Nazaire » and
opening into the lists is open on one side, masked by
the salient of the angle-watch-tower, and the threshold
of that opening is set at more tham two yards above
the ground of the lists. It was then necessary to set
ladders or a wooden inclined plane to get in and out.

In the tower itself the entrance is slanting, and if
from the outside you get in, through the postern pierced
on the east flank, only by means of ladders or a
sliding floor, you can go through the second entrance
only by turning off at a right angle. Each postern, then,
could only be used by men on foot. Each of the two
bays is provised with portcullises, machicoulis and
leaves. A well does duty for the lists and the first story
which also possesses a kiln. The first portcullis was
worked from the first story-hall, the second from the
watch as was the case at the « Porte Narbonnaise ».
The upper battlements are reared on a platform fitted
to receive a defensive-engine (mangonel) and have a
« guette »
	{^An opening shaped as a half cross.^}
for that point is one of the highest of the
city. The lower battlements (for the coping-defence is
double), is flanked by watch-towers which rise from
the foundations.

Still going eastward, we arrive, near the « tour Saint-Nazaire »,
at the towed n° 44, called « Saint-Martin »,
which seems to have been reared in the neighbourhood
of the tower n° 43 on purpose, in order to mask and
batter the postern within a very short range. That
tower is reinforced, like the towers 41 and 42, and like
those of the « Porte Narbonnaise », by a projecting bec
the use of which we have explained. It includes two
vaulted stories, two stories under ceiling, like the
--page 47
tower n° 41, and rises above the watch which winds
round it on the townside.

From that point of the onward walls, we see
reappear in the lower parts of the curtains and towers,
the remains of the Visigoth, ramparts down to the
tower n° 53, called « de Saint-Sernin », besides the
« Porte Narbonnaise ».

The towers n°ˢ 45, 46, 47, 49, 50, 52 and 53 are built
on the foundations of the primitive towers and are of
a smaller diameter than the towers of the XIIIth century.
The tower n° 48 alone has been entirely re-built
by Philip the Bold. In consequence, it presents, on
the outside, a projecting bec, and its structure is very
thick. That is because it was to rise high enough to
command the tower n° 18 of the outward walls a
tower called « de la Vade » or « du Papegay », a sort
of projecting dungeon, absolutely independent and
which was meant to batter the table-land that extends
on a level, opposite to that front.

The preceding towers, n°ˢ 45, 46, 47, 49, 50 and 52,
are not vaulted and wooden-ceilings separeted their
stories two in number only, and set on the full
ground-work of the Visigoth masonry. Their spiral
staircases project inside the halls and take from the
space of these. All those towers break off the circulation
on the watch of the curtains; it is necessary to
go through them to pass from one curtain into another.
The tower n° 49, called « de Daréja », is built on a
Roman substruction, made of big blocks of stone,
perfectly adjusted, without any mortar. The Roman
basement certainly supported a square tower, for the
Visigoths contented themselves with hammering down
the projecting arrises, in order to round off that massive
structure which contains only on rubble.

--page 48
On examining the constructions raised in the XIIIth
century, we see that the engineers have given to the
cylindric part (outward side) considerable thickness,
while, on the town-side, where the tower is closed by a
gable, the walls are pretty thin so as to obtain the
greatest empty space possible inside to lodge watchmen.
The tower n° 47 also presents, on the lists, in its
lower part, the remains of Roman basements, on
which is planted a Visigoth tower coped by the XIIIth
century structure. Thus, all that part of the walls,
included between the tower n° 44, and the « Porte
Narbonnaise » has been repaired and re-built in part
by Philip the Bold on the Visigoth walls, which had
been reared on the Roman ramparts. The perimeter
of the old town, then, is given by that of the Visigoth
town since, on the south side as on the north side, we
find the traces of Roman constructions under the
works due to the Barbarians.

On all that south-east front, the covings presented
in war-time and uninterrupted line, for those of the
curtains are connected with those of the towers by
means of a few steps. That was necessary to facilitate
the defence and could have no disadvantages, in case
when the besieger should have taken hold of part of
those covings, for it was easy to cut them off in a
moment and prevent the enemy from taking advantage
of that outward continuous watch to take hold
successively of the higher stories of the towers. The
besieger, compelled to give up part of those covings,
could set fire to them themselves, sacrifice, if necessary,
one tower or two, and retire into the distant
posts from the point fallen into the enemy's power, by
cutting off the wooden-floors behind them.

The stone-tables of the watches of the curtains
--page 49
reared under Philip the Bold are supported inside, to
increase the width of the upper watch, on the south
and south-east sides, from the bishop's tower to the
« Porte Narbonnaise », by stone-corbels. There exist
between those corbels square holes very deep,
contrived in the construction at equal intervals.
Those holes were meant to hold horizontal joists
the extremity of which could, if needful, be sustained
by posts. On those joists was set a continuous floor
which widened by so much the watch inside and
formed a salient very useful to get stores for the
covings, to put in battery stone-engines and trebuchets,
and to dispose at the foot of the ramparts, on
the « terre-plein » of the town stores and shelters
for a supplement of garrison.

The roofings which covered the covings must very
probably have covered also that supplement of
watches. We see how those large spaces, contrived in
the upper part of the curtains must have helped the
defence. And it must be noted here that that disposition
exists only in the part of the works which was
least defended by the nature of the ground and
against which, in consequence, the assailer must aim
all his efforts and could organise a regular attack.

Those precautions would have been useless where
the enemy could present themselves only in small
numbers owing to the steeps of the hill. On the south
side the enemy, supposing he had taken hold of the
outward walls, could fill up part of the ditches, destroy
a bit of the outward walls and drag near the inward
walls, on an inclined plane, one of those timber-belfries,
covered with fresh skins to ward off fire, by
means of which assailers rushed directly on to the
upper watches. It was only possible to resist such an
--page 50
attack which succeeded many a time, by gathering on
the point assailed a number of soldiers superior to the
besieging forces. How could they have done so on
those narrow watches? The coving once broken, the
merlons damaged by the stone-engines, the besiegers
rushing on to the watches, found before them only a
row of defenders brought to bay against an abyss and
presenting only a shallow line to that attacking-column
ceaselessly renewed. With that supplement of
watch which could be widened at will it was possible
to oppose to the assailers a strong resistance, to hurl
them back and even get hold of the belfry.

It is in those details of the foot by foot-defence that
we see appear the art of fortification from the XIth to
the XVth century. On examining carefully, on studying
scrupulously and in the the smallest details, the defensive
works of those times, we understand those tales of
gigantic attacKs which we are too ready to tax with
exageration. Before means of defence so shrewd, so
ingeniously combined, we find it easy to imagine the
huge labours of the assailers, the sliding belfries, the
stockades and castles with platforms, the revolving
sapping-engines, such as « chats » and galleries, those
mining-works which demanded considerable time,
when gun-powder was not used by armies. With a
resolute garrison, well provided, it was possible to
make a siege last indefinitely. Therefore it is not
uncommon to see a bit of a fortress resist for months
to a numerous army. Thence, often, that recklessness
and insolence of the weak towards the strong and
powerful, that habit of individual resistance which
was at the bottom of the character of feudal times, that
energy which produced such great things and such
great intellectual development amidst so many abuses.

--page 51
Apart from the gates pierced in the inward walls
there were several posterns. For the service of the
besieged, — especially if they had to guard double
walls —, it was necessary to make communications
easy between those two walls and to contrive posterns
opening out on the outside in order to be able to bring
swift help on to a point attacked and to get bodies of
men in and out without any possible opposition from
the enemy. On going over the inward walls of Carcassonne,
we see a large number of posterns more or
less well concealed and which must have allowed the
garrison to spread in the lists through a great number
of issues easily masked, or to get in rapidly in case the
first walls should have been forced. Between the « tour
du Trésau », on the north side and the castle, we find
two of those posterns, without counting the « porte de
Rodez ». One of those posterns opens out into the
ditch of the castle (fig. 16), the other besides the
tower n° 26. Between the castle and the tower n° 37
exists a postern equally opening out into the ditch of
the castle. Between the « porte de l'Aude » and the
« porte Narbonnaise » (west and south side of the
outward walls) we find the postern « Saint-Nazaire »
described before; between the towers 43 and 45, a
postern communicating with a spiral staircase, and
between the towers 50 and 52, a salient structure
n° 51, which contained a wooden staircase, communicating
with vast caves the outer issue of which is
placed besides the tower of the outward walls n° 19,
on the level of the bottom of the ditch and two galleries
of those caves opened out into the lists. That last
postern was very important for it made the upper
watches communicate directly either with the lists or
the outside. Therefore, behind the gate opening in the
--page 52
angle of the tower 19, is a vast vaulted hall capable
of holding about forty armed men.

Besides, there exists a postern which makes the lists
communicate with the ditch, at the intersecting angle
formed by the curtain on the right and the dungeon
« de la Vade » n° 18. There used to be a postern on
the right side of the big tower n° 4 of the outward
walls, a postern largely raised above the escarpment,
pierced in the outward walls of the « Porte de
l'Aude » and which required the use of a ladder, and
the postern still open in the angle of the tower n° 15,
as has been said before. Adding to those issues the
large barbican of the castle n° 8 we see that the garrison
could sally forth and communicate with the
outside without opening the two chief gates « de
l'Aude » and « Narbonnaise ».

Before we pass on to a description of the castle, it is
necessary to speak of the outward walls which also
offer considerable interest.

In those outward walls the best preserved tower (it
is intact except for the covering) is that of « la Peyre »
n° 19. That tower, like most of those dependent on
those walls, is open on the town-side in the upper
part, so as to make it possible to defend the inward
ramparts and to give orders, from the upper watch, to
the men posted in that tower. The middle of that
tower, like all those of the outwards walls, except for
the barbicans, was covered by a roof, but the embattled
watch was under open sky in peace-time and
could be provided with covings when there was a siege.

Those permanent roofs rested upon the inward
covering of the watch.

The figure 6 gives a plan of that « tour de la
Peyre ».

--page 53
{figure large "Figure 6." "figure6"}

--page 54
On the point M is sketched a profile of the whole
structure with the ditch, the crest-tiles of the counterscarp
and the outward ground forming a glacis. We see
how the loop-holes are contrived so as to ward off that
glacis from razing projectiles and from plunging projectiles
{figure large "Figure 7." "figure7"}
the crest and foot of the counterscarp. As to
the immediate defence, it is assured by the machicoulis
and covings, as is seen on the point P. The
figure 7 gives a general sketch of that tower on the
inward side, the coving being supposed to be set only
on the R side.

The tower n° 18, called « de la Vade » or « de Pape-gay »
--page 55
{figure large "Figure 8." "figure8"}
--page 56
is, although it belongs to the outward walls, is,
as we said, a reduct, a dungeon, commanding all the
table-land on that side, occupied before Saint-Louis's
reign, by a « faubourg ».

The curtains of the outward walls once fallen into
the besiegers' power, most of the towers of those walls
must have been easily taken, for they are scarcely
defended inside and their watches sometimes communicate
on a level with those of the curtains; however
some gates interrupt the circulation, but the « tour de
la Vade » is an independent and very high structure;
it possesses two vaulted stories, two stories between
ceilings, a well on the ground-floor, a chimney on the
second story and water-closets on the third. The gate
opening on the lists could be strongly barricaded and
oppose to the besieger an obstacle as resisting as the
walls themselves. The upper story was provided with
battlements under open sky with a roof in the centre.

Those battlements, which, in war-time, were provided
with covings, were commanded by the coping of
the tower n° 48.

The other towers of the outward walls are all built
very much on the same model as the tower n° 7, called
« la Porte-Rouge». That tower possesses two stories
under the battlements. The figure 8 gives the plans of
each of those stories. As the ground rises sensibly
from {_a_} to {_b_}, the two watches of the curtains are not
on the same level; the watch {_b_} is at three yards above
the watch {_a_}. On the point A is sketched the plan of
the tower under the terre-plein; on B, on the level of
the watch {_d_}; on C, on the level of the battlements of
the tower which levels the battlements of the curtain
{_e_}. We see on {_d_} the gate which, opening on the
watch, opens on a staircase wich goes down to the
--page 57
lower story A, and, on {_e_}, the gate which, opening on
the watch, above, opens on a staircase which goes
down to the story B. You reach, from the outside, the
battlements of the tower by the staircase {_g_}. Moreover,
{figure large "Figure 9." "figure9"}
the two stories A and B are set in communication by
an inward staircase {_h h′_}, taken from the thick of the
wall-tower. Thus the men posted in the two stories A
and B are alone in direct communication with the two
watches of the curtains. If the assailer has succeeded
in destroying the covings and the upper battlements,
and if, thinking to have made the works undefendable,
--page 58
he attempts to assault one of the curtains, he is received
in the flank by posts safety fixed in the lower
stories which, being easily blinded, have not been
{figure large "Figure 10." "figure10"}
crushed by the stone-engines or made untenable by
the burning of the roof and covings. A longitudinal
section made on the two watches, from {_e_} to {_d_}, makes
that disposition clear (fig. 9). We see on the point {_e′_}
--page 59
{figure large "Figure 11." "figure11"}
--page 60
the gate of the staircase {_e_} and, on {_d′_} the gate of the
staircase {_d_} of the plan. That last gate is defended by
a watch-tower {_f_}, which is reached by a staircase of six
steps. On {_h″_} begins the staircase which sets in communication
the two stories A and B. A layer of earth set
on {_k_} prevents the fire, which might be set to the roof {_l_}
by the besieged, from damaging the upper floor. The
figure 10 gives the section of that tower following the
perpendicular axis in front. On {_d_} is the gate opening
on the staircase {_d_}. The covings are set on {_m_}. On {_p_} is
sketched the profile of the escarpment with the prolongation
of the shooting-ranges of the two rows of
loop-holes of the stories A and B. It is unnecessary to
say that the covings batter the foot {_o_} of the lower.

A perspective view (fig. 11) taken from the lists
(point X of the plan C) will make clear the inward dispositions
of that defence.

The stores for the covings and watches of the tower
are got, by the battlement {_c_} of the plan C, by means
of a tackle and a pulley, as is shown by the perspective
sketch. Here the tower commands only one of the
watches (see the section, figure 9). At the time of the
construction, under Saint-Louis, it commanded the
two curtains; but, under Philip the Bold, when they
finished the defence-works of the city, they increased,
as has been said before, the relief of some of the curtains
of the outward walls which did not seem to have
a sufficient outlook. It is then that they raised the
battlements G above the older battlements H without
taking the trouble of pulling down the latter; so that,
on the outside, those first battlemens H remain
locked in the raised masonry. Indeed, the outward
ground rises like the ground of the lists from {_a_} to {_b_}
(see the plans) and the engineers, having thought it
--page 61
fit to adopt a uniform outlook of the curtains upon the
outside, as well for the outward as for the inward
walls, they made all the reliefs regular, in 1285. It
must be said, too, that, in those times, they scarcely
gave a more important outlook to the towers on the
curtains than to the projections, or to some points
from which it was useful to command the precincts at
a great distance.

As to the large fronts, the flanking towers have, on
the curtains, but a feeble outlook, and that disposition
also holds good for the large south east side of the
outward walls of the city repaired and capped by
Philip the Bold.

The disposition of that tower of the outward walls
which we have just described is such, that that structure
could not defend itself against the outward walls;
for, not only is that tower largely commanded, it is,
on the side of the lists, wholly undefended.

We have looked over and described the most important
points of the two walls of the city. Reverting to
the « Porte Narbonnaise » whence we set forth, and
ascending to the town through a narrow and winding
street we reach, going westward a castle built on the
culminating point of the city.

I said that the greater part of the constructions of
that citadel dated from the beginning of the XIIth century.
The first structure which presents itself on the
town-side is a barbican built in the XIIIth century,
semi-circular, embatteld, with watches (see the general
plan, fig. 16), and in which a front-gate is pierced.
That first gate was only defended by loop-holes and
leaves, provided with double shutters, a machicoulis
and wooden-leaves. It is, as may be seen, a charming
construction, well made and tolerably preserved.

--page 62
The wooden-floor and the roofing alone have been
done away with, but the trace of those complements
is so obvious that their disposition cannot be misunderstood.
The upper story of the gate was open on the
castle side, so as to prevent the assailers, who might
have taken hold of it, from defending themselves
against the garrison shut up in the castle. A wide
ditch protects three of the fronts of that citadel, the
fourth looking on the escarpments which face the
river Aude. A bridge rebuilt in part pretty recently,
gave access to the only gate of the castle on the front
facing the town. The piers of that bridge date from
the XIIIth century and the two last, near the entrance,
are disposed in such a way that it must have supported
a sliding wooden-floor.

The assailer found a first obstacle formed by a
wooden-fence covered with a shed. That obstacle once
pulled down, supposing the sliding floor taken off,
they had to cross a ditch two yards wide to reach the
first portcullis defended by a machicoulis. Behind
that portcullis is a wooden-gate a second machicoulis,
a second portcullis and a second gate. The second
portcullis was worked from the second story, the
second from a small room disposed immediately
above the passage.

The two towers which flank that entrance include
two stories vaulted in an hemispherical calotte, and
pierced with loop-holes the two upper stories are separated
by a floor. Those two upper stories, without any
partition-walls set the two towers in communication
with the space above the passage. It was only possible
to reach those stories by a wooden staircase disposed
against the flat side of the gate on the yard-side, or by
the curtain-watches. The vaulted halls are only
--page 63
lighted by the loop-holes. The third story gets light
from the yard through a charming romaïc window
with double arches resting on a small marble-column
with a sculpted capital, and also from a very small
opening giving sideways over the entrance outside.
That last window was pierced to allow the besieged
who stood by the first portcullis to see what took place
at the entrance and to take measures in consequence
without unmasking themselves. Although the towers
affect a cyclindric shape outside, inside, the facings of
the upper stories are cantwise. That structure was
evidently meant to make it easy to set the timber of
the roofing. It is much easier to cut and set timber as
a pavilion on a polygonal than on a circular plan; the
circular plan requires curved boards for the raising-pieces
and, to set the joists, complicated joinings. At
the end of the XIth century they must not have been
very skilful in that sort of constructions which, a century
and a half later, had reached such a degree of
perfection; therefore we must not be surprised to see
that shape of pyramidal timber adopted for all the
primitive towers of the castle. The builders compensated
the differences in projection produced by the
circular shape of the outward paring by means of
« coyaux ».

The first story communicates with the second by
means of a trap-door opened in the hemispherical
vault. That trap-door, pierced behind the small
window which allows to watch the entrance, was destined
to transmit orders to the men who stood by the
second portcullis in the small hall of the first story,
either to drop that portcullis rapidly in case of an
attack or to raise it when a body of men got in; for it
must be noted that the men at the second portcullis
--page 64
can see what happens outside only through a very
narrow loop-hole or through the machicoulis, opened
before that second portcullis.

In those defence-works so complete, of which we
give the plans figure 12, everything is contrived that
orders may come from the top, where the means of
defence the most efficient were displayed and where,
in consequence, the captain of the tower must have
stood at time of the attack.

Our war-ships with their hatchways, their speaking-trumpets
and their low batteries can give and idea of
the means for transmitting orders then used in fortified works.
	{^In the figure 12, the transversal section is traced on A. On I is
	the extremity of the fixed bridge; on B, the ditch covered by a flybridge;
	on C the first portcullis with its windlass on E; on D the
	second portcullis with its windlass on F; on G the holes of the
	covings. On H is traced the longitudinal section on the passage and
	the vaulted hallo.^}

All the copings of the walls and towers of the castle
reared about the beginning of the XIIth century were
defended in war-time by very salient covings, for it
will be noticed that the holes trough which passed
the swinging boards supporting those covings, are
double, pierced at about 0 m. 60 one above the other
so as to relieve the upper pieces supporting the floor
by small corbels and timber links. The setting of
those covings must have been less rapid than that of the
XIIIth century covings, supported by strong swinging
joists. However, it could be achieved without too much
difficulty, supposing the links to be jointed, without
any cocking, which, besides, would have been useless
since the wooden pieces crossing the walls were perfectly
fixed and could deviate neither to the right nor to
the left. A carpenter (fig. 13), astride on the upper
--page 65
{figure large "Figure 12." "figure12"}
--page 66
horizontal joist, could assemble the link sideways
with a mallet, taking care to fix it before by means of
a bit of rope.
	{^From the watches, the carpenters, slipped into the lower holes
	a first piece A, then a second swinging piece B. The workman, passing
	through the battlement, sat astride on that second piece B, as shown
	by the perspective detail B′ then fitted the link C into its joint. The
	head of that link was joined to the piece B by a peg; a small post D,
	forced into the system from behind stiffened it all. Thereupon, setting
	the madriers, it was easy to fix the double posts E between which
	they slipped the madriers serving as front guard, then they fixed the
	roofing which covered the coving and the watch so as to shelter the
	defenders from the projectiles hurled at them. Some notches G,
	contrived between the madriers, permitted to take aim.^}

The holes of the joists in the battlements of the
castle, being smaller than those of the constructions
dating from the XIIIth century, explain those additional
precautions, destined to prevent the swinging
boards from giving way at the extremity. It will be
observed, further, that the battlements of the castle
are high (2 metres) : that is because the floor of the
covings was set at the very foot of those battlements,
instead of being set, as in the XIIIth century, at
0 m. 30 above the ground of the watch. It was then
necessary to pass through those battlements as
through so many gates and give them a sufficient
height to enable the defenders to stand in the galleries
of the covings.

We must not omit to mention a very curious fact
concerning the history of the construction. Most of
the gates and windows of the towers of the castle on
the yard-side, are coped with lintels in concrete.
Those factitious stones have resisted atmospherical
influences much better than sandstones; they are
composed of perfectly hard mortar mixed with
pounded pebbles, large like an egg, and must have
--page 67
{figure large "Figure 13." "figure13"}
--page 68
been fashioned in wooden boxes. After having observed
on the spot some of those lintels, my attention
being roused, I found a pretty large number of those
concrete-blocks in the outward restorations of the
Visigoth walls undertaken in the XIIth century. It
would seem that the builders of the latter period,
when they wanted strong materials of comparatively
large dimension, made use of that process which
proved perfectly successful; for none of those lintels
got broken as happened frequently to the stone-lintels.

After passing through the gate of the castle, you
come into a spacious yard, surrounder now with
modern constructions which have been joined to the
curtains and towers. Those structures have been erected
on the spot of porticoes dating from the XIIIth
century the toothing-stones of which we still find.
Traces of fire are apparent on the facings of the XIIth
century-constructions and leads us to suppose that
those porticoes have replaced wooden-structures
lining the yard inside before the restorations undertaken
by Louis the IXth and Philip the Bold. On the east
and north-sides the walls were lined only by a simple
portico. On the south side stands a structure the entire
lower part of which dates from the XIIth century and
the upper part from the end of the XIIIth with repairings
in the XVth. That building contained, on the
ground-floor, kitchens under bent vaults, with a fine
semi-circular gate opened in the gable. It separates
the large yard from a second one, opening on the south
side and closed by a strong XIIth century curtain,
completely restored in the XIIIth. To that curtain
was joined a structure presenting a very wide portico,
on the ground-floor, with a hall on the first story. We
--page 69
still see, in their places, along the curtain, all the
stone-corbels which supported the floor of that hall,
a fine chimney the profiles and sculptures of which
belong to Saint Louis's time; and, in the angle of the
square tower n° 31, called « tour Peinte », the
toothing-stone of the pillars of the lower portico.
A large square window with mullions lighted, on the
south side, towards Saint-Nazaire, the large hall of
the first story. That window is set above the inward
floor and the disposition of the ceiling which closed
the widening is such that the projectiles flung from
outside could not penetrate into the hall. At the southwest
angle of the castle stand huge structures, sorts
of dungeons or reducts, independent from one another,
which commanded the yard and the precints.
The highest but most extensive of those buildings is
the tower called « Peinte » n° 31, which dominates
the whole city of which it was the chief watch-tower.
That tower, on a plan of unequal sides, could contain
and only contained, in fact, one wooden staircase, for
it is not divided, in its entire height by any vault or
floor. A single small romaïc window, pierced about
the middle of its height opens on the country, on the
side of the river Aude. That tower is untouched; we
still see its upper battlements with the holes of thé
covings very close to one another, as if to set a salient
outward gallery, fit to resist the terrible winds of the
region.

The plan of the tower n° 35 of the castle, called
« du Major » (one of those of the angle, the other
tower n° 32 being alike), is very interesting to study.
Those two angle-towers are the only ones which
contain spiral staircases, made of stone. The towers
n° 32, 34, 35 and 36 are defended, like the two gate-towers :
--page 70
the same small halls vaulted in hemispherical
calottes, the same disposition of the battlements,
the same combination of pyramidal roofs.

But it is on the west front that a study of the city-castle
is particularly interesting. The west side is
that which looks on the country and faces the large
barbican built at the foot of the escarpment.

To make clear the very complicated dispositions of
that part of the castle, we must get down to the barbican
and pass successively through all the windings
so ingeniously combined to make access to the castle
impossible to an armed troop.

Unfortunately the barbican was pulled down about
fifty years ago in order to build a factory along the
river Aude. That destruction is to be for ever regretted,
as, according to those who have seen that fine
structure, it produced great effect and was made of
fine materials. I was only able to find, by pretty deep
excavations, its foundations and its first layers, which
only permitted to ascertain exactly its place and
diameter.

The barbican had been reared very probably under
Saint-Louis, like most of the adjunctions and restorations
made to the castle. It was pierced with two
rows of loop-holes and was coped by an embattled
watch with covings. It was not covered, its great extent
scarcely allowing of it, but must have possessed inside
wooden galleries making access to the loop-holes easier
and forming a shelter for the defenders.

The gate was pierced in the inward angle, on the
north side, on the flank of the « caponnière » which
ascends to the city (fig. 14) on the point B. That
« caponnière » or slope, fortified on both sides, is
rather narrow at the foot near the barbican. It gets
--page 71
{figure large "Figure 14." "figure14"}
--page 72
broader on E up to the point where, making a turn,
it goes perpendicularly to the front of the castle so
as to be enfiladed by the besieged posted on the
watches of the double walls, or in the castle itself;
then, having reached the foot of the walls, the caponnière
winds off on E′, to the right, goes along those
walls from north to south, to reach a first gate of
which only the pilasters are left. Those slopes E are
embattled right and left. Their ascent is cut off by
overlapping parapets. On F was a watch-wall in front
of the first gate; having passed that first gate you
had to go along a second watch-wall, to turn off suddenly
to the left and find a second gate G, being
battered on the flank by the men of the second walls.
Then you came to an important and well defended
structure; it is a long passage, surmounted with two
stories under which you had to pass. The first of
those stories battered the gate G and was pierced
with machicoulis opening on the passage; the second
story was in communication with the upper battlements
battering either the slope or the space G. The
floor of the second story communicated with the lists
only by a narrow gate. If the enemy succeeded in
holding that second story, he was caught as if in a
mouse-trap for, the small gate closed on him, he
found himself exposed to projectiles falling from
the machicoulis of the second story; and the extremity
of the floor of that first story being broken off
on the point H, opposite to the entrance, it was impossible
for that assailer to advance. If he succeeded in
passing unhindered the passage on the ground-floor
he was stopped by the gate H, pierced in a cross-bar
coped by the machicoulis of the third story, communicating
with the upper watches of the castle. If,
--page 73
against all possibility, the besiegers took hold of the
second story, they found no other issues than a small
side-gate opening into a hall set on arches, outside
the castle, and communicating with the inside only
by winding which it was easy to barricade in a
moment and which, moreover, were closed by leaves.
If, in spite of all those accumulated obstacles, the
besiegers forced the third gate H, they had then to
attack the postern I of the castle, protected by a
system of formidable defence : loop-holes, two machicoulis
set one over the other, a bridge with a sliding
floor, a portcullis and leaves. Should they have got
hold of that gate, they found themselves at 7 metres
lower than the inward yard L which was reached
only by narrow steps defended, and by passing
through several gates on the point K.

Supposing the attack to be pushed through the lists
on the side of the « porte de l'Aude », they were stopped
by a post I and by a gate with wooden works
and a double machicoulis pierced in the floor of an
upper story communicating with the large hall N of
the castle, by means of a timber-passage which could
be destroyed in a moment; so that getting hold of that
upper story was no use.

If, after having passed the structure T, they went
further on the watch, along the square tower S, they
soon came across a watch with a gate duly provided
with machicoulis and built perpendicularly to the
passage G H After that gate, it was a third gate,
narrow and low, pierced in the big cross-bar Z, which
you had to pass; then you reached the postern I of
the castle. If, on the contrary, the assailer presented
himself on the opposite side, by the north-lists, he
was stopped by a defence V, but, on that side, the
--page 74
attack could not be attempted, for it is the point of
the city best defended by nature. The big cross-bar Z
which, starting from the castle-curtain, pushes forward
in a right angle, up to the slope of the barbican,
was coped by transversal machicoulis which commanded
the gate H and by an embattled watch-tower
which allowed one to see what happened in the
« caponnière », so as to take inside the necessary
dispositions or to recognize friendly troops.
	{^Our figure 13 shows, on the point C, the barbican on the townside
	with its gate (A′)» on O, the castle-gate; on L, the large yard;
	on P, the building holding the kitchens; on M, the second yard with
	the portico N, which supports the large hall; on Q and R, the buildings,
	dungeons; on D, the large barbican, and on X, and Y, the
	towers of the XIIth century.^}

That part of the fortifications of the city of Carcassonne
is certainly the most interesting; unfortunately
it now presents the aspect of a mere ruin. It
is by examining scrupulously the least traces of still
surviving constructions that we can reconstitute those
fine works. I must say, however that few points
remain vague and that the system of defence allows
of no doubt. It tallies exactly with the natural dispositions
of the ground and those ruins are still full of
fragments which reveal, not only the disposition of
the stone-constructions, but, moreover, the links, fastenings
and sealings of the wooden-structures, of the
floors and defences.

A rough sketch of the castle and barbican restored
which we give further on (fig. 15) shows the whole
of those works.

A plan of the city and town of Carcassonne, taken
in 1774, previous consequently to the destruction of
the barbican, mentions, in the references, a large cave
existing under the « boulevard de la Barbacane » but
--page 75
{figure large "Figure 15." "figure15"}
--page 76
filled up long ago. I could find no trace of that construction
the existence of which I am very doubtful of.
If that cave ever existed, it must have made the barbican
communicate with the fortified mill called « du
Roi » in order to allow the castle-garrison to reach
under shelter the river.

We have calculated the number of men strictly
neccesary to defend the city of Carcassonne.

++-----------------------------------------------+----------+
+| The outward walls of the city possesses 14    |          |
 | towers; supposing each guarded by 20 men, it  |          |
 | comes to                                      |  280 men |
 |                                               |          |
+| Twenty men in each of the three barbicans.    |   60     |
 |                                               |          |
+| To defend the curtains on the points attacked |  100     |
 |                                               |          |
+| The inward walls include 24 towers with       |          |
 | 20 men for each post; on an average           |  480     |
 |                                               |          |
+| For the « Porte Narbonnaise »                 |   50     |
 |                                               |          |
+| To guard the curtains                         |  100     |
 |                                               |          |
+| Fort the castle-garrison                      |  200     |
+|                                               | ----     |
+|                                               | 1270     |
 |                                               |          |
+| Let us add to that number of men the          |          |
 | captains, one for a post or for a tower,      |          |
 | according to the custom                       |   53     |
+|                                               | ----     |
+|                                               | 1323     |
++-----------------------------------------------+----------+

Only the fighting-men are in question here; but we
must add to those numbers the servants, the workmen
needed in great numbers to sustain a siege; that is at
least double the number of the fighting-men. That
number was rigorously sufficient to oppose a sturdy
resistance to the enemy in a place so strongly fortified.

The two walls had not to defend themselves simultaneously,
and the watchmen in the inward walls
could send off detachments to defend the outward
--page 77
walls. If these fell into the enemy's power, their
defenders took shelter behind the inward walls.
Besides, the besieger did not attack all points at the
same time. The perimeter of the outward walls is
1400 metres on the curtains; consequently about one
fighting man for a yard was needed to constitute the
garrison of a fortified town like the city of Carcassonne.

Here are the names of the towers of the two walls
referring to the numbers inscribed on the general
plan :


OUTWARD WALLS

1. Barbacane de la porte Narbonnaise.

2. Tour de Bérard, also called de Saint-Bernard.

3. Tour de Bénazet.

4. Tour de Notre-Dame, also called de Rigal.

5. Tour de Mouretis.

6. Tour de la Glacière.

7. Tour de la Porte-Rouge.

8. Grande barbacane extérieure du château.

9. Avant-porte de l'Aude.

10. Tour du petit Canizou.

11. Tour de l'Evêque, belonging to the two walls.

12. Tour du grand Canizou.

13. Tour du grand Brulas.

14. Tour d'Ourliac.

15. Tour Crémade, barbacane de la poterne Saint-Nazaire.

16. Tour Gantières.

17. Tour Pouleto.

18. Tour de la Vade, also called du Papegay.

19. Tour de la Peyre.


INWARD WALLS

20. Tours et porte Narbonnaise.

21. Tour du Trésau, also called du Trésor.

22. Tour du moulin du Connétable.

23. Tour du Vieulas.

24. Tour de la Marquière.

--page 78
25. Tour de Sanson.

26. Tour du moulin d'Avar.

27. Tour de la Charpentière.

37. Tour de la Justice.

38. Tour Visigothe.

39. Tour de l'Inquisition.

40. Tour de Cahuzac.

41. Tour Mipadre, also called tour du Coin ou de Prade.

42. Tour du Moulin.

43. Tour et poterne de Saint-Nazaire.

44. Tour Saint-Martin.

45. Tour des Prisons.

46. Tour de Castera.

47. Tour du Plô.

48. Tour de Balthazar.

49. Tour de Darejean ou de Dareja.

50. Tour Saint-Laurent.

51. Staircase going down to the postern of the tour de la Peyre.

52. Tour du Trauquet.

53. Tour de Saint-Sernin.



CASTLE


28. Tour de la Chapelle.

29. Tour de la Poudre.

30. Avant-porte du château.

31. Tour Peinte. Guette.

32. Tour Saint-Paul.

33. Porte du château.

34. Tour des Casernes.

35. Tour du Major.

36. Tour du Degré.

54. Barbacane intérieure du château.

--page 79



THE SAINT-NAZAIRE CHURCH

FORMERLY THE CATHEDRAL


That church is composed of a nave the construction
of which dates from the end of the XIth century or
the beginning of the XIIth, and of a transept with an
absis and chapels dating from the beginning of the
XIVth century.

We shall not undertake to discuss on the edifices
which may have proceeded the church we see nowadays
and the oldest parts of which date no further
than the year 1090. We shall not try either to analyse
the motives which led to the reconstruction of the
chancel, the transept and the chapels in the beginning
of the XIVth century, historical documents being
absolutely lacking. But a certain fact is that those
XIVth century structures have been raised on those
romaïc foundations which have been found everywhere,
and more particularly in the XIth century-crypt
which we found out under the chancel in 1857,
and which was then cleared off. The vaults of that
crypt alone had been destroyed in order to lower the
ground of that chancel in the XIVth century. They
were replaced by a stone-ceiling which leaves us
glimpses of the old pillars and walls pierced with
small bays.

The romaïc nave presents a disposition which has
been adopted pretty frequently in the churches of
Provence and Bas-Languedoc. The central vault, with
arch-wise joist is buttressed by vaults equally archwise
opening the very narrow aisles. That nave then
--page 80
is only lighted by the windows of the side-walls.
A semi-circular gate dating from the beginning of the
XIIth century is opened in the north-aisle for, in
older times, the west front of the nave, as we said
before, was near the ramparts and contributed to
defending them. Its foot was only pierced with a very
small gate which opened into a passage the toothing-stones
of which we still perceive.

About 1260 they joined to the south flank of the
romaïc transept a chapel the floor of which is on the
level of the pavement of the old cloister that is to
say about two yards above the church-ground. That
chapel contains the tomb of Bishop Radulphe the inscription
of which gives the date 1266 as being that
of the prelate's death. It is on the supplications of
that bishop that the inhabitants of the faubourgs
of the city, banished in consequence of the siege
undertaken by Viscount Raymond de Trincavel,
were authorized to re-build their town on the
other bank of the Aude. That tomb is a very interesting
monument although the figure of the personage
executed in basso-relievo, is mediocre; the image of
the sarcophagus which supports it, gives a series of
small figures perfectly preserved, representing the
canons of the cathedral in their choir-garb. That
basement is intact, for the ground of the chapel having
been raised up to the level of that the transept, the
lower parts of the monument remained buried for
centuries and have thus been preserved from mutilations.
The choir, the transept and the chapels have
been erected under the bishopric of Pierre de Roquefort,
from 1300 to 1320. The romaïc plan has been
adopted in the construction of that part of the church,
and that is why the two wings of that transept present
--page 81
an original disposition which belongs only to a few
edifices of the romaïc school of the South, previous to
the XIIIth century.

Indeed, on each of those cross-aisles open three
chapels set towards the east, separated only by openings
above blind basement-arcades. Four of the pillars
which form the separation of those chapels are
cylindric, as if to recall those of the XIIth century
nave.

The bishop Pierre de Roquefort seemed to intend
to make if his Saint-Nazaire-cathedral, so modest in
extent, a master-piece of elegance and richness. Contrary
to what we see at Narbonne, where sculpture
is entirely lacking, ornaments are lavished in Saint-Nazaire-church.
The windows, immense and numerous
(for that apsis and that transept seem a regular
lantern), are truly magnificent in composition and
colour. The chancel, the pillars of which are decorated
with statues of the apostles, was entirely painted. The
two side-chapels of the extremity of the nave, to the
north and south, were probably erected only after the
death of Pierre de Roquefort, for they are not related
to the transept as to construction and in one of them,
the north one, is placed, not subsequently, the tomb
of that bishop, one of the most graceful monuments
of the XIVth century that we know.

The strong south-east and west winds which reign
at Carcassonne had caused the chief gate to be opened
on the north flank of the romaïc nave; another gate
is pierced in the gable of the north-cross-aisle; and
in the angle of that cross-aisle is a pretty staircase
shaped as a salient small tower. On the two sides of
the chancel between the counterforts are disposed
two small sacrariums w^hich go only up to the window-tills.
--page 82
Those sacrariums are provided with double
closets, strongly iron-bound and taken from the thick
of the walls. They served as treasury, for it was the
custom to place on each side of the grand altar of
abbey-churches or cathedrals, closets destined to
contain the sacred vases, deliquaries and all precious
objects.

Besides the tombs of the bishops Radulphe and
Pierre de Roquefort we see, on the walls of the
chancel, on the gospelside, a fine alabaster-tomb of a
bishop whose statue is lying on a sarchophagus and
who is said to be Simon Vigor, archbishop of Narbonne,
who died at Carcassonne in 1575. That tomb
and the statue dating from the XIVth century cannot,
in consequence, be ascribed to that prelate. We shall
point out another mistake. A funeral slab was laid in
Saint-Nazaire-church which is supposed to have
belonged to the tomb of the famous Simon de Montfort.
Firstly the tomb of Simon de Montfort was
erected near Montfort-l'Amaury, in the church of the
abbey of « Hautes-Bruyères », and if there ever was,
at Carcassonne, a monument erected to his memory,
after the raising of the siege of Toulouse, it could
only be a funeral slab. Then the engraving of that
slab, the inscription are wrought by an ignorant and
unskilled forger. However that slab having been
found, it appears, without any one knowing exactly
where or how, and presented to Saint-Nazaire-church,
we did not think it right to reject it.

We see, inlaid into the wall of the chapel on the
right, a fragment of a basso-relievo, of greater interest
because it represents the attack of a fortified place.
That fragment, though very roughly wrought, dates
from the first half of the XIIIth century. The assailer
--page 83
tries to force the lists of a town surrounded with
walls and the besieged work a mangonel. They saw
in that basso-relievo a representation of the death of
Simon de Montfort, killed before the walls of Toulouse
by the stone of an engine worked by women
on the « place de Saint-Sernin ». The supposition is
not improbable, that basso-relievo dating from the
time of that siege and angels carrying away up into
the skies the soul of a personage, in human shape,
which may well be that of Simon de Montfort.

Among the finest glass-frames which decorate the
windows of the Saint-Nazaire-cathedral, we must
mention that of the first chapel near the chancel, on
the epistleside, which represents Christ on the cross,
with the temptation of Adam, prophets holding phylacteries
on which are written the prophecies relative
to the coming and death of the Messiah. That window
is one of the most remarkable of the XIVth century
for skill in harmonizing the colours. But, in the chancel,
there exist two windows supplied, in the XVIth
century, with glass-frames of great value which belong
to the fine « Ecole toulousaine » of the Renaissance.
The « grisailles » are modern and have been fabricated
with the help of old fragments still subsisting.
The glass-frames of the two rose-windows and of the
two chapels of the nave are old and have simply been
restored with the utmost care.

The vestry, joined to the chapel of Bishop Radulphe
has been built at the same time as that chapel, then
repaired in the XVth century.

--page 84

THE CITY INSIDE

There exist, inside the city, only a few fragments
of the old houses and three wells. One, broad, with
a fine brink surmounted with three pillars dating from
the XIVth century. That well has been dug in the rock
at a very early time, and is filled up now; the other,
much narrower the brink of which dates from the
XVth century, the third in the cloister of Saint-Nazaire.
There must have existed cisterns in the city,
for those three wells and those dug in some of the
towers, as has been seen, could not supply sufficiently
the wants of the garrison and of the inhabitants.
A single one of those cisterns has been discovered by
us; it is dug under the slope of the « porte de l'Aude »
between the two walls. You get down to it by a staircase,
contrived in the thick of the first walls, and they
could draw up the water it contained by a draft-hole
with a brink which we see along that wall on going
up to the « porte de l'Aude ». That cistern is now
partly filled up; it must have been supplied by the
rainwater collected between the « porte de l'Aude »
and the cloister of Saint-Nazaire, and perhaps by a
spring which gives now very little water.

We still see, joined to the inward ramparts, buildings
which have been reared at the same time as the
defence-works and were probably destined to contain
posts and superior commanders. Those remains, are
apparent : on the « porte Narbonnaise » — inward
side on the left, behind the towers n°ˢ 51, 52, 48,
--page 85
and 44, inside the « porte de l'Aude » and behind the
tower n° 25.

A small church existed along the walls, near the
« Porte Narbonnaise »; it was the church of Saint-Sernin,
the apsis of which was formed by the tower
n° 53. In the XVth century, a window with mullions
was opened in that apsis, through the Visigoth masonry.
The church was pulled down during the last
century; it was of Romaïc structure.

---

This brief description of the city of Carcassonne
can make us understand the importance of those
remains, the interest they present, and how capital
it was not to let them perish. The church of Saint-Nazaire
has been completely restored by the care of
the « Commission des Monuments historiques ». Those
works, undertaken in 1844, were only finished in 1860.
All the towers of the inward walls, discovered long
ago, and particularly the vaulted ones, had suffered
much from the rigours of the atmosphere. Those ruins
have long been given up to the inhabitants of the city
who did not scruple to take away the materials of
the parapets and of the watches within their reach
and to use the towers to deposit their filth. To circulate
on the watch was very difficult. On the south
front, a large number of houses and hovels still leant
on the ramparts. Those houses which constitute what
is still called to-day « Quartier des Lices », are occupied
by a poor population of weavers who live on
damp ground-floors, huddled with tame animals.

Since 1855, works of restoration and especially of
consolidation and covering of the towers have been
undertaken in the city of Carcassonne under the high
--page 86
supervision of the « Commission des Monuments historiques ».

Every year, since that time, loans are made to
restore the parts of the walls which suffer most and
present most interest. Already most of the towers of
the inward walls are covered as they used to be. Bits
of wall which threatened ruin, especially about the
« porte de l'Aude » have been re-set and consolidated,
the watches are practicable. On his part, the war-administration
has put some money at our disposal,
and, every year, the « Conseil Général de l'Aude » and
the town of Carcassonne grant sums which are specially
affected to acquiring the houses still leaning
on the ramparts.

Although the sums disponible are not great every
year yet the result obtained is considerable and the
many strangers who visit nowadays the city of Carcassonne
can form an accurate idea of the system of
defence employed in the fortifications of the diverse
periods of the Middle Ages.

I do not know, in the whole of Europe, of such
complete and formidable works of the VIth, XIIth
and XIIIth centuries, a subject of study so interesting,
a more picturesque site. All those who care for old
monuments who love and know the history of our
country wish to see that restoration completed and,
already in the south, the city of Carcassonne, scarcely
visited formerly, has become a resort for all travellers.

--page 87
{figure large "Figure 16. — General plan of the City." "figure16"}

--end
